

Cell Phones

It seems like everyone has a cell phone these days, but using one while driving is not safe! As of July 1, 2008 drivers in California are prohibited from driving a vehicle while using a wireless telephone unless the person uses a system that allows hands-free listening and speaking (CVC 12810.3). Already most of Europe, the United Kingdom, and parts of Asia and Africa ban cell phone use while driving. You can see why, can't you? Each time you take your mind, ears, and maybe even your hands away from the task of driving, you are putting you and others at risk of a collision. The best thing to do is pull over where it is safe and call once you are completely stopped. (Remember, it is not safe or legal to stop on a freeway.)

Effective July 1, 2008 Drivers are prohibited from driving a vehicle while using a wireless telephone unless the person uses a system that allows hands-free listening and speaking. However, the law does allow for handheld cell phones to be used to make an emergency call to a law enforcement agency, medical provider, fire department, or other emergency service provider (CVC 23123).

A person who is under the age of 18 years is prohibited from operating a motor vehicle while using a wireless telephone, even when equipped with a hands-free device, or while using a mobile service device. The law provides an exemption for the use of wireless telephones or mobile service devices for emergency purposes (CVC 23124).

Texting, Emailing, IMing

As of January 1, 2009 a new law went into effect that writing, sending, or reading a text-based communication while driving is against the law for all drivers in California and is punishable by a base fine for a first offense with an increasing fine for each subsequent offense. With the addition of penalty assessments, fines can be more than triple the base fine amount.

This new law applies to electronic wireless communications devices used to manually communicate with any person using text-based communication, including, but not limited to, communications referred to as a text message, instant message, or email.

Video in the Car

Technology allows us to have DVD players, global positioning systems, and all kinds of state-of-the-art devices right in our vehicles. However, drivers beware! There is a safety law that states television receivers, video monitors, or television or video screens, or any other similar means of visually displaying device may not be placed where the driver can view it unless the equipment is set up to disable itself when the vehicle is driven. The exceptions to the rule are global positioning displays and visual displays used to enhance the driver's view forward, behind, or to the sides of the vehicle (CVC 27602).

Stereo Headphones

Did you know that it is illegal to wear earphones covering both ears when you are driving? That is true whether you are in a vehicle with four or more wheels or riding a motorcycle or bicycle. In some communities, even joggers are prohibited from wearing earphones. Here's a metaphysical question. If you don't hear the car that hits you, can it still kill you? Not wearing stereo headphones when you're in traffic is another case of using common sense.

