

Your Car is Not Your Office

Would you believe that some people type on their laptop computers while driving to their jobs? You may have done this yourself, feeling confident in your ability to multitask. But safe driving can't be done by someone who is operating office equipment at the same time. If you are using a computer or cell phone while driving, you are a distracted driver.

Although the automobile has become an extension of the workplace for many who commute from their home to place of business, you can't drive safely if you make business calls, send emails, review documents or type notes to prepare for a meeting or project while you are supposed to be driving.

Don't Drive Angry

If you are angry, emotionally upset or preoccupied with personal problems, your cognitive abilities will be limited by emotional stress and mental distractedness. Your body and brain must work together at full capacity, in case you need to respond to an emergency situation on the highway.

Do not drive if you are emotionally distressed, because your concentration on the activity of driving will be impaired. If an argument erupts with a passenger, take time out off the road for your heated discussion, or postpone the conversation until you arrive at your destination. For your safety and the safety of others, you should give driving your full attention.

Scenery and Window Shopping

As a passenger in a motor vehicle, it can be pleasurable to gaze out the window at some beautiful rural scenery, read notices and billboards, or stare at an impressive home. Storefronts are a great source of distraction, advertising items you'd like to buy. If you pass a movie theater it's natural to read and talk about what films are playing. Its fine for passengers to enjoy the sights, but the driver who succumbs to the temptation to rubberneck puts everyone at risk.

If you are driving, concentrate on ensuring the safety of everyone in your vehicle and its vicinity. Ask your passengers to describe what they are seeing, and enjoy the scenery and sights through their eyes.

Don't Fiddle with the Instruments

Making adjustment to your vehicle is distracting, and should always be done while your car, truck or motorcycle is parked in the driveway, in a parking lot or on the roadside. Before you start the engine and get on the road, take the time to check the position of your mirrors, program your in-vehicle navigation system, find a radio station, or locate the CD you want to listen to while driving. Get your sound system playing at the appropriate level before you start driving, not during your trip. If you don't like the music the radio station is playing, find a better one before you leave, or ask a passenger sitting in the front seat with you to change the station while you drive. Adjusting your side or rear-view mirrors while driving requires you to take your eyes off the road ahead and leaves you vulnerable to hazards.

Some drivers can't seem to stop making adjustments to the control panel while they are driving. Instead of fine-tuning the temperature setting in moving traffic, take advantage of stop lights to look over at your dashboard and adjust the heating, cooling or ventilation system. Use a voice-activated navigation system to make adjustment to your itinerary, or ask a passenger to re-program the device while you drive.

