Unit 9 - Driver Distractions

Driving while distracted is not just a harmless interruption in the progress of your vehicle. It is a potentially fatal mistake. Driver distraction occurs when you do other things besides driving. A distraction can be any person, thing or event that interferes with your ability to operate your vehicle safely. If you are not completely attentive to the complex physical and mental requirements of driving, you will not be ready to respond appropriately to the continual shift and flow of traffic conditions.

Driver distractions are the primary cause of most vehicle collisions, according to a research study conducted by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) and the Virginia Tech Transportation Institute (VTTI). Cited online by the DMV, this study found that 80% of accidents and 65% of barely avoided accidents happen within three seconds of a driver being distracted from his or her driving.

Think about the times you have passed another vehicle on the highway and observed the driver doing something besides driving, such as dialing a number on a hand-held cell phone, reading a road map, leaning over to grab an object moving around inside their vehicle, turning their head to stare at something outside their vehicle, or putting on makeup while looking in the rear view mirror. Did it occur to you that those drivers were engaged in dangerous behavior?

In fact, those very actions are the primary driver distractions listed by the NHTSA/VTTI study. Any driver who engages in these activities on a regular basis is more likely to be involved in or to cause a collision.

Safe driving requires all the driver's faculties to be in engaged in the act of driving, which requires a complex set of perceptual and motor functions. In order to drive safely, you need to be able to see and hear well enough to detect potential hazards. You must have the ability to act quickly in emergency situations and to keep control of your vehicle at all times. You must constantly search the road and identify traffic signs, signals, pedestrians, vehicles, and other potential hazards. You must exercise good judgment to decide on the safest course of action in the event a potential hazard becomes an actual one. Finally, you must execute the correct driving maneuver required in the traffic situation. If one of these critical abilities is missing or impaired, safe driving cannot be accomplished.

Distracted driving happens when other things demand the driver's attention and action besides the vehicle and the road. If a driver has his or her eyes and ears focused on a distraction instead of fully engaging visual, manual and cognitive skills in the act of driving, no one on the road near that driver is safe! 
