Cellular Phones

Cellular telephones are everywhere. In an emergency, they can be a lifesaver. In non-emergency situations, they can be a great tool if you use the cellular phone in a safe and responsible manner. Unfortunately, cell phone use has become so common that people wrongly assume it is safe to use a cellular phone in a motor vehicle.

The DMV reports that the use of cell phones among California drivers has increased over the last several years to the point where on an average moment on any day, as many as 10% of drivers are using either a hand-held or hands-free phone. The DMV further reports that research indicates cell phone conversations represent a higher level of driver distraction and a lower level of driving performance, even if the driver is using a hands-free device. "The percentage of vehicle crashes and near-crashes attributed to dialing is nearly identical to the number associated with talking or listening." (www.dmv.ca.gov, 2011)

Research has shown that drivers are at much higher risk for being in an accident within a few minutes of using a cellular phone. Surprisingly, it appears that it is the emotional impact of the phone conversation, not the act of talking per se, that significantly distracts the driver and results in increased accident risk.

Under California state law it is illegal, regardless of age, to drive a motor-vehicle while using an electronic wireless communication device to:

    Write, send or read text messages.
    Write, send or read instant messages.
    Write, send or read email(s).

Adults may not use a cell phone while driving unless hands-free equipment is being used. Minors MAY NOT use a cell phone, even if using a hands-free device, unless in certain emergencies.

    It is against the law for a minor to use a cell phone while driving. If your cell phone rings, do not answer the call or respond to the text message.
    There are convictions for cell phone violations and they are subject to fines. A cell phone violation is punishable by a base fine of $20 for a first offense and $50 for each subsequent offense. Although the fines seem relatively low, court fees can raise the total amount substantially.

The only exception to the law is that you are permitted to use a cell phone to contact law enforcement, a health care provider, the fire department or another emergency entity in the event of an emergency situation.

Cellular phone use while driving also has been shown to increase your risk of a traffic accident. A number of tips for using cellular phones were presented earlier. In general, minimize cellular phone use while driving, and never take your eyes off the road.

As of 2008, a person who is under the age of 18 years is prohibited from operating a motor vehicle while using a wireless telephone, even when equipped with a hands-free device, or while using a mobile service device. The law provides an exemption for the use of wireless telephones or mobile service devices for emergency purposes.

The safe use of cellular phones in vehicles includes:

    Pulling over to the side of the road to use the phone (Please note that it is against the law to make a non-emergency stop on a freeway)
    Knowing how to use your phone's speed dial and redial functions
    Using a hands-free device and so you are able to keep both hands on the steering wheel
    Keeping the phone within easy reach
    Not using the phone during hazardous conditions (e.g., heavy traffic or bad weather)
    Letting the person to whom you are talking know you are in a car so you can terminate the conversation quickly
    Paying attention to the road while talking
    Placing calls when you are not moving
    If you must dial while driving, only dialing a few numbers at a time and checking traffic
    Avoiding stressful, emotional, or distracting conversations
    Getting voicemail so you don't have to answer the phone while driving.

