

Types of Driver Distractions

When you do anything besides driving while you are sitting behind the wheel of a moving vehicle, you are distracted. Distractions that can lead to accidents include:

    Eating food or drinking beverages
    Engaging in personal hygiene or grooming
    Operating the radio, tape or CD player
    Using ear buds or headphones
    Using a pager or cell phone
    Operating or paying attention to a navigation device
    Paying attention to children or pets in the car
    Boisterous or inappropriate behavior by your passengers
    Responding to peer pressure to drive too fast or otherwise show off
    Reading while driving
    Thinking about something other than driving while behind the wheel.

If you are distracted by psychological or situational factors, even for just a split second, you will not be able to react to hazards as quickly and it could result in a serious accident. Safe driving requires concentration. If you are preoccupied with your emotions, you will not be able to focus on the task of driving safely. Therefore, you should not drive if you are under severe tension, emotionally distressed (e.g., angry or upset), or otherwise preoccupied with your emotions or thoughts.

Conditions in the outside environment, such as heavy traffic, bad weather, and road work can cause you to become stressed, especially if you are in a hurry. Being late to work or to an appointment can increase your anxiety level and heighten your sense of urgency about getting there on time. You may drive unsafely as a result of being impatient with other drivers, feeling overly pressured to get through traffic and angry when someone doesn't get out of your way quickly enough or drive fast enough. If you allow yourself to become stressed, you may express your feelings inappropriately and cause an accident.

Conditions inside your vehicle, such as distracting passengers, loud music, and moving objects can also cause you to drive unsafely. Driving is a complex task that requires your full attention to avoid being involved in an accident.

Looking out your window at what you are passing while you are driving can be a distraction if you are concentrating on getting a good look at:

    an accident
    a vehicle pulled over by law enforcement
    construction work
    a billboard advertisement
    a scenic view
    street names and addresses

Always focus on your driving. It's crucial that you remain alert while on the road to arrive at your destination safely. Remember that no one but you is responsible for your driving behavior. Reduce the distractions in your driving environment whenever possible. When you are driving, make sure that the only thing on your mind is driving safely.

