

The Cost to Society

According to the DMV, alcohol-related fatalities represent at least 38% of all traffic deaths in California. Drug use is involved in at least 19% of traffic deaths in California.

tombstones

(Statistics presented were found in The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's report titled, Traffic Safety Facts 2005: A Compilation of Motor Vehicle Crash Data from the Fatality Analysis Reporting System and the General Estimates System.)

Intoxication and The Law

The legal system takes a hard-line approach to driving under the influence. The number of traffic fatalities combined with the influence of organizations like Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) has resulted in tough new penalties and restrictions. New legislation reflects society's changing attitude toward the drunk driver.

    Age 21 is now the legal drinking age in all fifty states.
    All 50 states (including California) have a current Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) limit of .08 (.04 when driving a commercial vehicle). When your BAC is at that level or above, you are presumed drunk.
    Most states now have "sobriety checkpoints" where police officers randomly check for intoxicated drivers.
    In most states, a person now convicted of causing personal injury, death, or property damage while driving under the influence must pay restitution to victims, whether it be directly or to an established general fund. In California, you will also be billed by the state for the cost of any emergency response made necessary by your act.
    Preliminary breath tests are legal in about half of all states, including California.
    Currently, in most states, refusal to submit to tests for alcohol use is admissible in a court of law as evidence. In California and many other states, it is grounds for immediate suspension of your driver license. When you apply for a license, you expressly agree to this provision of law.
    In most states, drunken driving resulting in a death is now prosecuted as felony vehicular homicide or vehicular manslaughter but may be charged as murder if there are aggravating factors. In California, all persons are required as a condition of obtaining or renewing a driver's license to sign a declaration acknowledging that a driver may be charged with murder if a person is killed as a result of driving under the influence.
    The law is very strict with regard to simply carrying alcohol or other drugs in a vehicle. You must not drink any alcoholic beverage in any vehicle you are driving or riding in. You may not carry on yourself, or have in the vehicle, any opened container with alcohol inside. Any container of liquor, beer, or wine in the vehicle must be full, unopened, and have an intact seal. Anything with a broken seal must be placed in the vehicle's trunk or be completely out of the passenger compartment. It is illegal to have an unsealed alcoholic beverage in the glove compartment.

Driving while intoxicated is a serious offense and could negatively impact the rest of a driver's life, not to mention the lives of others affected, such as their parents, children, spouses, or the victims of crashes. Drunk driving can have a profound and long-lasting destructive impact on society, causing great physical and emotional trauma to individuals and families.


Penalties for Driving Under the Influence (DUI)

If a driver is convicted of driving under the influence, there are serious consequences and loss of driving privileges. The consequences vary, depending on whether a driver is under 21 years of age or over 21 years of age. If the individual has had previous convictions, the penalties become harsher. It is officially called "Zero Tolerance."

If drivers are under 21 years of age, it is against the law to purchase or drink alcoholic beverages. The law says that if their BAC is .01%, it is unlawful to drive. If they refuse or fail to complete a Preliminary Alcohol Screening (PAS) test or their BAC is .01% or more, the officer will take away their license on the scene and serve them with an order of suspension. That effectively means that any trace of alcohol in their blood when driving is considered drunk driving. The following illustrates why the law was enacted.

For drivers under 18, an alcohol-related offense will result in a driver's license revocation for one year or until they turn 18, whichever is longer. Also, teenage drivers can receive fines that range from $390 to $1000, not counting legal expenses.

The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety has compiled statistics revealing that 28% of highway crashes in which someone was killed by a driver between 17 and 19 years of age, involved alcohol levels of .10 or higher. The truth is that young drivers have the most crashes, and are responsible for a disproportionate percentage of deaths, injuries, and damage to property.

If you are under 18 years of age, your risk of a fatal crash is about 2 1/2 times that of the "average" driver, and your risk of an injury crash is 3 times higher than that of the average driver.

If you, as a driver, are ever convicted of a DUI charge, and you drive a vehicle registered in your name, it may be impounded for up to 30 days; and you will have to pay the storage. You will not get the vehicle back until the storage has been paid; and each day you fail to redeem it, the storage charge increases.

If you are convicted of DUI and are over 21 years of age, you are subject to the following restrictions and loss of driving privileges:

1st Offense:

    The judge can sentence the driver to from 96 hours to 6 months in jail.
    The driver will be fined and assessed between $390 and $1,000. This does not include legal expenses that could cost thousands of dollars.
    The driver will lose his or her license for up to 6 months.
    If the driver was driving a vehicle registered in his name, the court may confiscate it for up to 30 days and then charge storage fees.
    The driver must have a special certificate of insurance (SR 22). (This insurance is expensive!!)
    The driver must complete a DUI program of at least 3 months and at least 30 hours of instruction. Or, if the driver's BAC is over .20% or the driver refuses to take a sobriety test on a 1st DUI offense, the DUI program will be at least a 9-month program consisting of at least 60 hours of instruction.

The financial costs can amount to thousands of dollars. But there is more. The driver could lose his job. If the driver were you, how would you get to work? When you weigh this with all of the other consequences, you have to ask yourself if it's worth it.

2nd Offense (within 10 years):

    The driver can go to jail for up to a year
    The driver will be fined and assessed between $390 and $1,000. (Not counting legal expenses, remember.)
    The driver's vehicle may be impounded for up to 90 days.
    The driver will lose his license for 4 to 5 years.
    The driver must have a special certificate of insurance (SR 22). (This insurance is expensive!!)
    The driver must complete a DUI program.

3rd Offense (within 10 years):

    The driver will lose his license for up to 10 years.
    The driver will pay a heavy fine.
    The driver will spend at least 120 days in jail.
    The driver must apply for a new license after revocation.
    The driver must have a special certificate of insurance (SR 22). (This insurance is expensive!!)
    The driver must complete a DUI program.

4th Offense (within 10 years): Don't go there! You can be charged with a felony, and if convicted, you can go to state prison for 1 year.

Repeat Offenders

It is unlawful for any person on probation for a driving under the influence offense to operate a motor vehicle at any time with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.01% or greater. This imposes an admin per se driver's license suspension on anyone found to be in violation of this prohibition.

Any person that fails to submit to, or fails to complete, a preliminary alcohol screening test or other chemical test at the direction of a peace officer having reasonable cause to believe the driver is in violation will result in the suspension or revocation of the person's privilege to operate a motor vehicle for a period of one year to three years.

