Unit 2 - Careless Driving and its Consequences

We've all seen examples of careless driving on the road. There is a long list of unsafe driving actions: speeding, making unsafe lane changes, failing to use the turn signal, and so on. We're quick to notice the careless driving practices of other drivers, but the fact is that at some point in our driving careers, we are all liable to do something unsafe or neglect to practice the rules of defensive driving. Gaining an understanding of the true consequences of our own careless behavior will lead to fewer accidents and lower fines for everyone.

What do you risk?

If you drive carelessly on a regular basis it is only a matter of time until you are involved in an accident. It could be that your careless driving caused the accident, or that your lack of attention to the road resulted in an otherwise avoidable accident. In either case, the result could be devastating. You risk damaging your vehicle, possibly beyond repair, and causing bodily harm to yourself, your passengers and any other people involved. Death or injury to you or someone else are very likely consequences of careless driving. You have to consider the degradation of your quality of life when you consider driving carelessly.

Insurance Increase

If you are found to be at fault for an accident, you risk an increase in insurance rates. Insurance providers determine your rate based in part on how likely you are to make a claim against your insurance policy. Even if you are an extremely capable driver, it only takes one lapse of judgment to send your insurance provider the message that you are not a safe driver.

Legal Action

You may be lucky enough to survive an accident, but can your bank account survive a lawsuit? California laws and DMV codes generally allow an individual who was injured in a car accident to hire a lawyer (or represent themselves), and bring an injury claim or lawsuit for recovery of damages. If it can be established that the "at fault" driver was negligent, the person filing the lawsuit is entitled to recover damages for injuries.

DMV Actions

The DMV has recently developed a system of computer-generated warning letters and sanctions. The notices are triggered when the DMV receives conviction notices from the courts. Careless drivers, as defined by the number of points they have, are much more likely to become involved in serious crashes than other drivers. The purpose of the system is to warn the negligent drivers, so they can change their driving habits before they hurt themselves or others. The warning system also points out that continuing to accumulate points can result in the suspension of their driver's license. The DMV has created a special system of warnings for drivers with alcohol-related citations. Drinking drivers receive notices tailored to reduce DUI offenses. The DMV believes that this system will result in an overall cost reduction, and negligent drivers will be removed from the road earlier. The DMV's Office of Research estimates that more than 600,000 drivers annually will be contacted under this system versus fewer than 180,000 previously.

The DMV considers drivers negligent operators of a motor vehicle and subject to license suspension or revocation if they accumulate:

    4 points in a 12-month period
    6 or more points in a 24-month period
    8 or more points in a 36-month period

In 2001 a bill was passed to address road rage. This bill specifically provides that the court may order the suspension of the driving privilege of any driver who commits an assault on the driver or passenger of another vehicle, a bicyclist, or a pedestrian when the offense occurs on a highway. This suspension is in addition to existing penalties. The law prescribes a suspension period of six months for a first offense and one year for a second or subsequent offense. The court may also order the convicted person to complete a court-approved anger management or "road rage" course prior to reinstatement of the driving privilege.

Suspension

Suspension of a driver's license is an action taken by the DMV that suspends a driving privilege for a specified period of time. A driver's license still exists, but a person cannot use it to drive until the suspension has been removed.

As of January 2002, if a vehicle is driven by a driver with a suspended license, the vehicle will be impounded. However, the vehicle will be returned to the registered owner before 30 days if the driver acquires or reinstates a driver's license and can show proof of insurance.

Revocation

The revocation of a license is a permanent removal of a driver's license. The driver's license will be physically taken from a person and destroyed. It may be reinstated only after the driver requests reinstatement and has satisfied the DMV that whatever events causing the revocation have been corrected. If the DMV allows the person to drive again, he or she must repeat the original process of getting a driver's license including application, testing, and fees.

Cancellation

Cancellation of a license occurs when, for any reason, a driver voluntarily elects to surrender his or her license to the DMV. Protecting one's driving record is an act of intelligence and responsibility. Much of what drivers do involves common sense and having a safe driving attitude. They must have good driving skills plus a solid knowledge of the traffic laws of the state in which they are driving. With these elements in place, any person of driving age can enjoy the privilege of driving for many years of safe transportation.

Contributing Factors Can Cause Collisions

Traffic collisions occur as a result of negligence, fault or error on the part of one or more drivers. The most common causes of collisions are driving at unsafe speeds, driving on the wrong side of the road, making an improper turn, violating right-of-way rules, violating stop signals and signs, and driving while distracted. All of these are the result of irresponsible or careless driving behavior.

While contributing factors such as driver fatigue and mechanical failure of the vehicle are completely preventable, other causes can be unpredictable. If you suddenly come upon the scene of an accident while driving at high speed on the freeway, and slow down to take a look without checking for other vehicles or people on the highway, you may cause another crash. If you ignore the driving rule against wearing a headset covering your ears, you may fail to hear another driver's horn alerting you to danger. Safe driving requires constant vigilance and careful attention to making right, responsible choices under all road conditions.

It is dangerous to get so comfortable with driving that you feel overconfident and invincible. Don't imagine you can successfully and safely multitask instead of focusing solely on driving safely. As a new driver, you learned all the rules of the road and you used them wisely. Continuing to apply the rules and safety measures will continue to keep you safe behind the wheel. 
