Skids

Skidding is most likely to occur when you change speed or direction. Your wheels have the firmest grip on the road when they are rolling straight ahead at a steady pace. As soon as a vehicle's wheels start to slide, a driver can lose control because the coefficient of friction is reduced. If your car is equipped with anti-lock brakes (ABS), you could notably decrease the possibility of skids. NOTE: ABS brakes should not be pumped!

Types of Skids

All-wheel braking skid: Any sudden and heavy application of your brakes could cause all four wheels to lock. The more slippery the road, the less brake pressure it takes to create a skid.

Rear-wheel braking skid: An improperly adjusted brake is usually the cause of this type of skid. It can cause the vehicle to turn completely around if the road is slippery enough, and you hit the brakes hard enough.

Front-wheel braking skid: This skid is also caused by improper brake adjustment. In this case, the vehicle will continue to roll straight ahead with no steering control. You can gain control only when there is rolling friction between the tires and the pavement, so let off the brakes completely.

Power skid: Too much acceleration in a rear-wheel vehicle can cause the rear of the vehicle to lose traction. Continued acceleration with counter steering can make the vehicle "fish tail." "Fish tailing" occurs when the rear end of the vehicle begins swinging back and forth. Since acceleration is the culprit, easing off the accelerator and steering into the skid will correct the problem.

Spinout skid: Going too fast through a turn or curve can cause the rear of a vehicle to skid from side to side. A strong gust of wind striking the vehicle from the side, coupled with incorrect steering, can cause a complete spin on slippery roads.

Avoiding Skids

The smartest driving method for handling skids is to avoid them in the first place. Here are some tips on how to avoid skids:

Use tire chains. When driving in snow or icy weather, put on tire chains, as required by law. Make sure they fit and learn how to put them on before you find yourself in bad weather. Determine whether your car has front-wheel drive or rear-wheel drive -- tire chains always go on the driving wheels.

Check your tires. Incorrect tire pressure can adversely affect a vehicle's handling, tire wear, or gas mileage. Check your vehicle's manual for the proper tire pressure level and keep your tires properly inflated. Also, make sure the tread is deep. Bald tires cannot grip the road, and that will increase the possibility of skids. To check the tread depth, use "The Abe Lincoln Test"... Place a penny into the tread. If the grooves are at least as deep as Abe's beard, there is enough tread. If not, you are at risk of skidding when having to brake suddenly.

Adjust your brakes. Have your brakes serviced and adjusted on a regular basis. Your life or that of your loved ones may depend on it.

Drive sensibly. Drive at moderate speeds appropriate for the conditions you find yourself in. The faster you go, the harder you have to brake in emergencies, and the greater the risk of skids. Do not make hard turns at the last minute and do not wait to stop until you have no choice but to slam on the brakes. Make your turns carefully, brake early and easily. Check your brakes occasionally by gently pressing on them to make sure they are functioning normally. Be especially careful in cold weather. One degree of temperature could make the difference between life and death. At 33 degrees Fahrenheit, the road is wet; at 32 degrees Fahrenheit, it is icy, and traction is at its poorest. Keep in mind that bridges and overpasses are the first to freeze and the last to thaw in these weather conditions.

Drive more slowly on slippery roads. Reduce your speed, and keep more distance between your vehicle and the one ahead of you.

Do not weight the trunk. A common misconception for increasing traction is to place weights in a vehicle's trunk. It is a dangerous mistake. All it does is reduce traction on the most important wheels - the front ones. These are the wheels most necessary to steer your vehicle. If you add weight, add it to the center of the vehicle, where the weight will be evenly distributed on all wheels. Putting weight in the trunk of a front-wheel drive vehicle is doubly dangerous. Front-wheel drive vehicles not only steer from the front, they pull from the front; and the added weight in the rear diminishes both steering and power, two important things for correcting skids.

Correcting Skids

Sometimes skids cannot be avoided and must be controlled and corrected. Here are four rules you should memorize to control skids. These rules constitute the short-hand version for correcting skids. Memorize them now while you are safely sitting in front of your computer, and they could save your life later when you are driving.

The Short Version

    Regain control of steering BEFORE applying a vehicle's brakes.
    Ease up on the accelerator.
    If you have a manual transmission, briefly depress the clutch to relieve engine pressure; then let it back out slowly.
    Steer in the direction of a skid.

The Long Version

    Remain calm. This is the most important rule for any emergency. Panic makes the situation worse. It clouds reason and inhibits motor responses. Staying calm can save your life.
    Get off the gas. Ease up on the accelerator without removing your foot completely. Letting off the accelerator quickly will only cause the engine pressure to increase and reduce forward motion. This can worsen the skid.
    Steer into the skid. If your vehicle is skidding to the left (meaning the back of the vehicle is sliding sideways to the left, causing the front of the vehicle to point more to the right than you want it to), turn your steering wheel to the left. Resist the natural impulse to turn away from the skid; it will only make it worse. Steering into the skid is the only way to regain control of the vehicle.
    Straighten wheels and turn into the skid again. As the vehicle begins to skid in the opposite direction (which is what you want it to do), straighten the wheels. The vehicle will start to swing in the opposite direction again. Once again, steer into the skid. Repeat this procedure, and each time the skid will be smaller as the vehicle comes increasingly under control.
    Brake only when the vehicle is under control. As the vehicle straightens and you are moving forward in a controlled direction, start applying your brakes. Remember, brake only when you have reached this moment of control. Braking too soon can throw you back into another skid.

