Unit 5 - Driving Maneuvers


Backing Up Safely

Backing up also requires a few simple precautions and techniques for safety. Backing up is always dangerous because it is hard to see what is behind your vehicle. Whenever you need to back up, follow these rules:

    When you are about to back your vehicle out of a parking space, always check both in front and behind the vehicle before you get in. Children, pets, and small objects around your vehicle are hard to see from the driver's seat. Be sure they are completely out of the way and fully in view before you start to move your vehicle.
    Make sure that it is legal to back up. It is not only illegal but unsafe to back up on the freeway, so please don't attempt it!
    A driver should check traffic in both directions. Look carefully over your shoulder, both to the left and to the right, before backing up and again as you are in the process of backing up. Don't take it for granted that other vehicles or pedestrians will not enter the roadway behind you as you back out of a parking space.
    Release the parking brake and look over their inside shoulder with your left hand on the steering wheel, then release the foot brake slowly. Apply the accelerator if needed and be ready to brake to control the speed of the car. Proceed slowly while backing up, in order to avoid collisions.
    A driver should check the front occasionally if backing up takes more than a few seconds.
    Backing around a corner is always a dangerous maneuver. A driver should go slowly and stop until he or she gets a clear view of any traffic, pedestrians, or other objects in the way.
    If, as a driver, you notice movement is constricted when attempting to back up, ask a passenger or someone to help you get out of the spot. Look through the rearview and side-view mirrors before attempting to back up.
    Since so many crashes occur while backing up, try not to back up if possible. Rather, look for a parking space that does not require backing up. Try to park in a relatively traffic-free area; often, it is possible to drive forward instead of backing up.

Speaking of backing up, how is your driving knowledge regarding this question?

Question: A vehicle ascending a hill on a one-lane road meets a vehicle descending the hill. Which vehicle has the right of way? Which one should back up and yield the right of way to the other?

Answer: The vehicle going uphill has the legal right-of-way. The vehicle going downhill has to back up and yield to the one going uphill. Drivers backing uphill have more control over their vehicle than those backing downhill. When backing downhill, you are given an assist from gravity, and your speed increases, making it much easier to lose control of your vehicle. Also, vehicle brakes are more efficient in the forward direction than they are when backing, due to a mechanical characteristic of brake shoes that are hinged at one end and spread apart by a brake cylinder at the other. You can't tell this at normal low backing speeds, but when backing downhill, it is not just gravity that makes you have to press on the brake pedal harder, it is also the loss of the "self-energizing effect" of the single-cylinder brake actuators that most vehicles have. 
