

Passing Properly

In an ideal world, everyone would travel at the basic speed limit (the safest legal speed for the situation). No one would ever need to pass, except in the case of a vehicle traveling far below the speed limit. As good as that may sound, this is not a perfect world. Passing is a common driving behavior. But safety requires that you consider your need to pass and ask yourself whether the situation warrants your pulling ahead of the vehicle you are following, or if your personality is dictating the pass.

Much of the passing seen on roads is motivated more by personality needs and has nothing to do with the needs of the situation. Some drivers drive as if they are in a contest, and that can be the quickest way to cause a collision. Drivers should limit passing to situations that call for it and try to satisfy their competitive urges in a more appropriate situation. Passing is one of those driving situations that makes drivers most vulnerable to a crash. If you must pass, use safety measures to ensure that you drive safely.

Passing Properly

Most of the time drivers will pass another driver on the left. The following instructions refer to passing on the left.

    Drivers should be sure that it is legal to pass where they are intending to pass.
    Drivers should turn on their turn signal before moving out into the passing lane.
    Drivers should check the road ahead for oncoming traffic. There is a passing distance, called the passing range, which is required for each separate instance of passing. The speed of the vehicle being passed and its speed while passing determine this range. If, as a driver, you are certain an on-coming vehicle will not enter your passing range while you are passing, go ahead and pass. If you are not certain, do not pass.
    Before they pull out into the passing lane, drivers should check both rear view mirrors to make sure someone has not first decided to pass them.
    Drivers should check their "blind spot" by looking over their left shoulder.
    Once drivers have checked the front once more and determined it safe and clear, then they may move out into the passing lane to make the pass. Motorists should not signal their intention to pass by flicking their high beams. High beams can blind oncoming drivers.
    At speeds of between 50 and 55 mph, safe passing requires a 10-12 second gap in oncoming traffic. Drivers should accelerate at least 10 to 15 miles per hour faster than the car they intend to pass. At 55 mph, both you and an oncoming vehicle will travel 800 feet in 10-12 seconds, and you will need over 1,600 feet, or about one-third of a mile, to pass and return safely to your lane.
    Judge your passing distance carefully when you see a vehicle approaching in the other lane. Exercise special caution when approaching a hill, an intersection or some kind of obstacle on the highway. Play it safe to pass another day. If you are in the slightest doubt about the distance required to pass safely, do not attempt the maneuver.
    Once drivers have passed the vehicle in front of them, they should check their inside rear view mirror. They should not re-enter into the regular lane until they can clearly see the vehicle they just passed in their inside rear view mirror! This indicates there is enough room to return to your driving lane. When they can see the vehicle, they should first signal their intention to move back into the lane.
    Re-entering the lane should be done smoothly, and the driver should resume a speed consistent with the speed limit.
    Passing other vehicles on a two-lane road is dangerous, and should be avoided.
    When passing a bicyclist on the highway, slow down. Move your vehicle over far enough to give the bicycle enough room, and don't squeeze the rider off the road.

There are a few instances when passing on the right is permitted:

    A driver may pass on the right when another vehicle is preparing to make a left turn, and there is room to pass safely on the roadway.
    Drivers may pass on the right when they are on the open road, and there are two or more lanes marked in their direction.
    A driver may pass on the right when in a business or residential area where the road is wide enough for two or more vehicles traveling in the same direction.
    When passing vehicles going in the same direction on a one-way road.
    When the left half of the road is blocked
    When another vehicle is turning left at an intersection into or out of a private road or driveway.


Being Passed by Another Vehicle

Except when passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal or the momentary flash of headlights by the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.

Head-on Disaster

Head-on collisions are surprisingly rare on highways; but when they do occur, they are almost always devastating. It is not uncommon for the drivers and passengers in both vehicles to be killed. By following the outlined rules for safe passing, you will minimize your risk of a head-on collision; but if you are ever faced with that possibility, avoid direct impact.

One option is to turn your vehicle to take the impact on one side/corner of the frame instead of straight ahead. If possible, drive off the road. Your chances of surviving a collision with an oblique impact, a side impact, or even a rollover are better than if you take the impact head-on.

