

Merging With Traffic and Proper Lane Changes

Moving from one lane to another, entering the freeway from an on-ramp or entering the road from a curb is always a risky matter that requires caution and foresight. Use the following safe driving procedures every time you merge with traffic or change lanes.

Start your lane change by signaling and looking in your mirrors to check the traffic behind you and beside you. Look over your shoulder to make sure that the lane you intend to move into is clear and there is enough room for your vehicle in that lane. Check your blind spot to ensure you don't miss other vehicles.

Any time a driver merges with other traffic, he or she needs a gap of four seconds. That will give both the driver and the car behind a two-second following distance. As a driver, you need a four-second gap whenever you change lanes, enter a freeway from an entrance lane, or merge with another road.

A driver should not try to squeeze into a gap that is too small. He or she should leave a big enough space cushion. The driver should watch for vehicles around his or her vehicle. He or she should use the vehicle's mirrors and signal at least 5 seconds in advance. The driver should turn his or her head to look quickly to the side before changing lanes while checking for cars in the blind spots.

If you have to cross several lanes, take them one at a time. Filter through traffic slowly. If you stop to wait until all lanes are clear, you will tie up traffic and may cause a crash.

If there are no acceleration lanes available, drivers should accelerate while they are on the on-ramp, then look over their shoulder, find a sufficiently longer gap in the traffic, and accelerate to blend into the traffic. Drivers should always keep a three-second following distance between the vehicle and the car ahead of them. The technique for establishing a three-second following distance will be described in Unit 6 of this course.

Changing Lanes for Emergency Vehicles

When you hear sirens or and horns warning you of the approach of an emergency vehicle, you must be ready to change lanes quickly and safely. The law requires all vehicles to yield the right-of-way to any police car, fire truck, ambulance, or other emergency vehicle sounding a siren that has at least one red light that is visible from a distance of 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle.

If you hear the siren or horns of an emergency vehicle or see at least one red light, pull over to the right and stop, no matter which direction the emergency vehicle is traveling. All drivers must cooperate to make a lane for the emergency vehicle in the safest manner possible. Drivers should wait until the emergency vehicle has passed their position before pulling back out into the lane of traffic. It is against the law to follow within 300 feet of an emergency vehicle!

If drivers are in an intersection, regardless of what the signal light indicates, they should clear the intersection, then pull over to the right and stop.

Slow or Move Over

Drivers are required to take specific precautionary actions on a freeway when passing a stopped emergency vehicle displaying emergency lights, or a tow truck or Department of Transportation vehicle when the amber lights are activated. Drivers are directed to proceed with caution and to make a lane change into an available lane not immediately adjacent to the emergency vehicle, tow truck or Department of Transportation vehicle if practicable and not prohibited by law. If the driver cannot make a safe lane change, they are to slow to a reasonable and prudent speed that is safe for existing conditions.

