

Seat Belts

Wearing a seatbelt while driving will stop the forward momentum of your body if you have a collision. It will prevent you from hitting the windshield, steering wheel, and other parts of the interior of your vehicle.

In reported crashes, 73% of passenger vehicle occupants who were totally ejected from the vehicle were killed. The purpose of seat belts and shoulder straps is to keep your body from hitting the steering wheel, windshield, or other portions of the interior of your car in a crash. Safety belts are effective in preventing total ejection from a car in a crash. Your chances of surviving an accident are five times better if your body remains inside the vehicle during a collision.

If a vehicle is equipped with seat belts, they must be worn by the driver and all passengers while the vehicle is moving, regardless of whether the vehicle has air bags. If the seat belts have lap and shoulder straps, both must be worn. You or your passenger (if age 16 or older) may be given a traffic citation for not wearing a safety belt. A seat belt is required for each person who is age eight or older and is over 4 feet 9 inches in height.

If you wear only a lap belt when driving, your chances of living through an accident are twice as good as those of someone who isn't. If you wear both a lap and shoulder belt, your chances are three to four times better.

Correct and Incorrect Seatbelt Use

To be effective, seatbelts must be in good working order and worn properly. In general, the shoulder belt should fit snugly against your body. You should never wear the shoulder belt under your arm; wear a seatbelt that is twisted, or be reclined in your seat when moving. Safety belts can become ineffective by wear and damage, particularly after an accident, and should be inspected along with other periodic maintenance of the vehicle.

Pregnant women should wear lap belts as low as possible under the abdomen and the shoulder strap should be worn between the breasts and the side of the abdomen's bulge.

Seat belts are required for persons riding in the beds of pick-up trucks. Otherwise, it is illegal to ride in the bed of an open pick-up truck.

