

Windshields

Windshields: A passenger vehicle other than a motorcycle; every bus, motor-truck, or truck tractor; and every fire truck, fire engine or other fire apparatus, whether publicly or privately owned, must be equipped with an adequate windshield. It's against the law to drive a vehicle on the highway when the windshields or rear window are in such a defective condition as to impair your vision to the front or rear.

Windshield Wipers: Every motor vehicle, except motorcycles, equipped with a windshield must also be equipped with a self-operating windshield wiper. Every new motor vehicle, except motorcycles, must be equipped with two such windshield wipers, one mounted on the right half and one on the left half of the windshield, except that any motor vehicle may be equipped with a single wiper so long as it meets the wipe area requirements in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards Governing Windshield Wiping and Washing Systems.

Condition and Use of Windshield Wipers: Windshield wipers must be maintained in good operating condition and must provide clear vision through the windshield for the driver. Drivers should keep the windows and mirrors of the vehicle clean. Light rays from approaching vehicles and other glare will distort a driver's view if the windows and windshield are smeared with road oils, dirt, or tobacco smoke residue. Even light swirls on the glass will greatly reduce visibility.

Wipers must be operated under conditions of fog, snow, or rain and be capable of effectively clearing the windshield under all ordinary storm or load conditions while the vehicle is in operation. Be sure your windshield wiper motor is working and that the linkages to the wipers are functioning - before you need to use them!

Materials Obstructing or Reducing Driver's View: California law states that no person may drive any motor vehicle with any object or material placed, displayed, installed, affixed, or applied in or upon the vehicle that obstructs or reduces the driver's clear view through the windshield or side windows. Those little mementos hanging from the rear view mirror are illegal!

The Vehicle Code provides specifications for the safe use of sun screening devices and tinting of windows. When cars are manufactured, they are in conformance with these specifications. Any change in tinting or the modification or installation of sun screening devices must be done in accordance with the California Vehicle Code.

