

Handling Mechanical Failures on the Road

A significant number of accidents are caused by vehicle equipment failure such as:

    bald or defective tires
    bad brakes
    inoperative lights
    degraded steering and suspension components

To help avoid accidents caused by mechanical failure, you should keep your vehicle in good working condition and perform routine maintenance.

Even properly maintained vehicles will occasionally experience mechanical failure. You should know how to react to avoid an accident when it happens to you. First, remember not to panic, so you will be able to think more clearly and respond appropriately.

Many accidents happen because a driver didn't see a stalled car until it was too late to stop. When your car breaks down on the road, make sure that other drivers can see it. If you are having car trouble and must stop, pull off the road away from all traffic. If you cannot get completely off the road, try to stop where people can see you and your car from behind--don't stop just over a hill or just around a curve.

Turn on your emergency flashers to warn other drivers that your vehicle is broken down. If your car does not have emergency flashers, your turn signals may be used instead. Give other drivers plenty of warning. If you have them, place emergency flares or reflective triangles 200 to 300 feet behind your vehicle. This allows other drivers time to change lanes, if necessary.

If you lose power or have an equipment failure on a highway, do not stop in traffic. Pull to the shoulder and completely off the pavement. Safely position your vehicle as far away from traffic as possible, making sure that your vehicle is visible for at least 200 feet in either direction and vehicles have enough space to pass. Do not use the shoulder next to the center divider if you can avoid it. Warn others that you are having difficulties by using your brake lights, turn indicators, hazard lights, and flares.

If your vehicle is parked, stopped, or left standing on a freeway for more than four hours, it may be removed by law enforcement or you may be issued a citation.

If your brakes suddenly give out while driving, you should:

    Downshift to lower gear or lower range (automatic transmissions) to help slow your vehicle.
    Pump the brake pedal fast and hard to build up brake fluid pressure -- you will know in three to four pumps if the brakes will work -- but do not pump anti-lock brakes.
    Use your parking or emergency brake to gently slow your vehicle, but release it before the vehicle starts to skid.
    Steer and swerve to avoid a collision or steer into something soft like bushes.
    Sound your horn and flash your lights to alert other drivers.
    When you are stopped, turn off the ignition and turn on your emergency flashers.

If your brakes get wet and do not work (such as after you travel through a big puddle), dry them by lightly pressing the gas pedal and brake pedal at the same time so that the vehicle drives against the pressure of the brakes. Do this only until the brakes begin working.

Staying Safe in Your Vehicle

Always lock your car doors while driving, and roll the windows up far enough to keep anyone from reaching inside. At stop signs and lights keep the car in gear and stay alert. Keep your purse and other valuables out of sight, even when you are driving in your locked car.

In case of an emergency breakdown, stay in your vehicle until help arrives. If you have a cellular phone, use it to call for help. Be careful for your safety and stay off the roadway. Don't even attempt to change a tire if it means you will be present in a traffic lane. You are safest in your car with the doors locked and your seat belt securely fastened.

Be extremely wary of accepting help from well-meaning motorists who stop to investigate. Even the most harmless-looking stranger can be dangerous. Do not open your window or get out of your vehicle to discuss the problem with someone you don't know and trust. Wait for the CHP or road service to arrive. It's better to be safe than sorry!

