

Car Seats for Children

If a child is under eight years of age, and less than 4' 9" in height, the driver, parent, or legal guardian, if present, must secure the child in a federally-approved child passenger restraint system in the back seat of the vehicle. Officers can pull over a vehicle that does not have a child properly restrained.

A child of under 8 years and less than 4' 9" in height may ride in the front seat only if the child passenger seat cannot be installed in the back seat, if there is no rear seat or the rear seats are side-facing, if all rear seats are already occupied by children under 12, or if there is a medical reason for the child to ride in front.

Motor vehicle collisions are the leading cause of death or injury to children under five years of age. Because children are small, they may not benefit from built in safety features inside the vehicle. It has been estimated that when correctly used and installed, child car seats can reduce deaths by about 90% and injuries by 70%.

There are special requirements for the use of infant seats and child seats based on the age and weight of the child. Babies up to 20 pounds and about age one should ride in a safety seat secured to the back seat facing the rear of the car. Babies should not be placed forward or backward in the front passenger seat if the vehicle is equipped with an active passenger-side air bag. Make sure the vehicle's seat belt is put through the right slots in the child safety seat and correctly fastened.

Child Safety Locks: Special-purpose child safety locks are built into the rear doors of most vehicles to prevent rear seat passengers from opening the doors during transit or while the vehicle is stationary. When the child lock is engaged, the interior handle is rendered useless so the child cannot open the door from the inside. Some vehicles also feature window-locking mechanisms that keep the windows in the back two doors of the car from opening all of the way and prevent a child from 'falling' out of the window.

