Unit 10 - Vehicle Requirements to Operate on the Road


Lights

Make sure your lights work. The California Vehicle Code states "All lighting of a required type installed on a vehicle shall at all times be maintained in good working order." Every motor vehicle must be operated with headlamps on from 1/2 hour after sunset until 1/2 hour before sunrise and whenever weather conditions prevent a driver from clearly seeing a person or other motor vehicle on the highway from a distance of 1000 feet. All vehicles other than a motorcycle must have 2 headlights on when driving during darkness.

Keep them accurate. A headlight aimed only one degree too high will cast light five feet too high at a distance of 300 feet. If the light is one degree low, the illumination at 300 feet is reduced over 20 percent below normal. Headlights aimed too high will also blind oncoming drivers and create a potential disaster for both drivers. It is illegal to drive with headlights that are not properly adjusted.

Taillights warn drivers of vehicles ahead of them, and brake lights warn them that vehicles ahead are slowing down or stopped. When it's dark, the tail lamps of your vehicle should light up red and be clearly visible from all distances within 1,000 feet to the rear of your vehicle.

Stop Lamps: Red stop lamps must be plainly visible on every vehicle, and able to be seen from a distance of 300 feet to the rear both during normal sunlight and at night. Stop lamps on a vehicle of a size required to be equipped with clearance lamps shall be visible from a distance of 500 feet during such times.

Back-Up Lamps: Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, must be equipped with one or more backup lamps. Back-up lamps should be directed to project a white light illuminating the roadway to the rear of the vehicle for a distance not to exceed 75 feet. Backup lights help avoid collisions by improving visibility and alerting other drivers while you are backing up at night.

Exterior lights should be regularly checked for burned out bulbs that you may not be aware of from inside the vehicle. Interior lights are necessary to see displays both at night and during the day, are essential in case of an emergency at night, and must be maintained in proper working order.

Fog lamps: Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed two fog lamps which may be used with, but shall not be used in substitution of, head lamps. Fog lamps, driving lamps, and passing lamps look similar to one another, but must meet different photometric specifications, and the laws concerning their use are different. Fog lamps may only be used with head lights.

If both your headlights go out while driving at night:

    Wiggle the dimmer switch, which will often put the lights back on.
    Wiggle the headlight switch a few times.
    If the lights do not come on, put on your parking lights, turn indicators, or emergency flashers to warn other drivers.
    Pull off the road as quickly as possible and leave the emergency flashers on. You might try checking your battery terminals to see if they are loose or checking your fuses to see if one or more is blown.

It is illegal to drive with only your parking lights turned on. Do not try driving at night with only your parking lights working. It is extremely dangerous, even for only short periods. Also, do not attempt to use your high-beam headlights and keep driving, because you will not be able to dim them for other vehicles on the roadway. 
