

Emotional Distress

Your emotional state influences your ability to concentrate, stay alert, be courteous, think clearly, contain anger and aggressiveness, and control tendencies to "show off". Your emotions affect your physical state and influence you to act in certain ways that are often unconsciously programmed.

Safe driving requires all your concentration. When you are preoccupied with your emotions and the emotional reactions of other people, you will not be able to focus on the task of driving safely. You should not drive if you are under severe tension, emotionally distressed (e.g., depressed, angry or upset), or otherwise preoccupied with your emotions, thoughts or personal problems.

Emotional stress can have a serious impact on driving. Medical research shows that heightened emotional states can interfere with cognitive processing and motor functioning. Worrying about health, finances, relationships, families and career can distract your mind from the task of driving, and slow down your reflexes in an emergency. You may fail to notice potentially hazardous situations. You may feel confused, foggy and unable to predict what other drivers around you might do. Your judgment may be temporarily impaired, allowing you to take risks that under normal conditions you would avoid.

Of course, it's impossible to avoid getting emotional about tragic events in life such as the illness or death of a beloved family member or the loss of a job or home. Research studies have shown that strong negative (and even positive) emotions distract drivers as much as, or more than talking on a cell phone. If you realize that being upset may seriously affect your ability to drive, you can take steps to manage your emotional state, and thus ensure your ability to drive safety.

If you recognize that you are upset, pull your vehicle off the road. Take some time to breathe deeply and give yourself time to feel what's happening. If you are deeply grieving for the loss of a loved one, let your tears flow until you are calm again. Tell yourself that you can relax. Open the car window or get out of the vehicle to clear your head. Stop at a restaurant and refresh yourself with a light meal or non-alcoholic beverage. Don't get back on the road until you have regained your balance and can focus on your driving.

