

Traffic Strategies to Keep Your Cool

You can avoid situations leading to road rage by:

    Not tailgating
    Not driving slowly in the left (fast) lane
    Not cutting off other drivers
    Not making obscene gestures or otherwise reacting to the mistakes of other drivers
    Merging into traffic at an appropriate speed
    Yielding the right of way
    Not taking up more than one parking space
    Not letting your car door hit the vehicle in the space next to you in a parking lot
    Avoiding unnecessary use of your high beam headlights
    Keeping your music turned down to a reasonable volume
    Allowing plenty of time for every trip you take
    Remembering to be courteous

If you find yourself in a situation with an aggressive driver, avoid making eye contact, because to some people, eye contact is the same as a challenge. If someone is determined to act out his or her frustrations, even a friendly smile can be misinterpreted.

Give the angry driver plenty of space. If you make a driving error (even accidentally), it is possible the other driver may try to pick a fight with you. Put as much distance between your vehicle and the other car as you can, even by changing routes, if necessary.

Do not be aggressive towards other drivers when you are on the road. Be patient when other drivers make mistakes and avoid getting frustrated by giving yourself extra time to get to your destination and being aware of road conditions so that you can take an alternate route.

If you think you are being followed by an aggressive driver, don't drive home. You would only be telling your follower where you live.

You should:

    Stay calm -- as long as you think clearly, you'll be in control of the situation
    Flash your lights and sound your horn long enough to attract attention to you and consequently the person following you
    Drive to a safe spot such as a police station and sound your horn and flash your lights
    Do not leave this safe location until you're sure your follower is gone.


Good Driving Attitudes

The attitudes essential to good driving are:

    Courtesy
    Consideration for others
    Alertness
    Using good judgment
    Acting responsibly
    Foresight

Safe driving requires:

    Courtesy to others
    An understanding of the laws and rules of the road
    The ability to rapidly apply good judgment to situations
    The ability to recognize situations that could rapidly develop into hazards
    The ability to take responsibility for your own actions

Your life and the lives of your passengers are in your hands while you are driving. If you act irresponsibly, such as by drinking and driving, you are putting more than just your own life at risk. Think before you act or get behind the wheel.

