

The Absentminded Driver

In heavy traffic, it is easy to "zone out" and start thinking about all sorts of things besides driving. If you find your attention wandering, do something different, such as rolling down the window or changing the radio station, to keep yourself focused on driving. Remember to continually scan the roadway and your mirrors.

Sometimes while driving you may drop something, lose a contact lens, be stung by a bee, be distracted by children, or be bothered in some other way. Some people panic when these things occur. They become more concerned with the problem than their driving and often run off the road or into another car. Don't let this happen to you. If you have a problem or there is a distraction, pull over to the side of the road immediately and then take care of the problem.

Undistracted Driving

One excellent way to practice safe driving is to eliminate and avoid all ways to be distracted from your basic responsibility, which is to operate your vehicle in traffic. The most essential rule to remember at all times is to keep your eyes on the road and your hands on the wheel of the vehicle. Ask a passenger to change the CD or radio station.

Plan your trips and review maps before pulling out of the driveway, not while driving. Never stop on a freeway or other roadway if you are lost or to read directions. Exit the freeway or pull to the side of the roadway, park, and study the map again. Another option is to have a passenger do the navigating for you while you are driving. Prepare for parking and bridge tolls before the trip by having the money in an easily accessible place, or ask a passenger to hand you the fare.

What happens on the highway is unpredictable. When you are driving, the condition of the roadway you are on and the behavior of other drivers can change abruptly, leaving you little or no time to react. When you are driving, follow these rules:

    Stay focused.
    Pay attention.
    Expect the unexpected.

Driver distractions reduce your awareness to your driving environment, your decision-making process and your driving performance. This results in crashes or near-crashes and corrective actions having to be taken by you and/or other drivers on the road. Drive safe and stay alive. Keep your mind on your driving; keep your eyes on the road, and your hands on the wheel!

