Distractions for Teen Drivers

Teenage drivers are vulnerable to many forms of distraction. Distracted driving is especially dangerous for teens that are still learning to practice the full range of defensive driving skills, and don't have experience dealing with emergency situations that arise on the highway. Parents of very young or inexperienced drivers should help to ensure that they keep distractions to a minimum. One way to do this is to discuss the issue of distracted driving with teenagers.

Give teens tips for avoiding driver distraction. Many websites publish information about the dangers of texting while driving, with statistics on teenage fatalities and injuries in distracted-driving accidents.

Drivers in California are prohibited from wearing headphones or earplugs. No matter what your age, it is against the law to cover your ears with headphones while you are operating a motor vehicle. Your auditory perception is necessary to ensure your complete safety. Teens should to set the volume of their music at a level that is not distracting to drivers, passengers or other vehicles. CD players and IPODs should be activated and adjusted before driving.

Younger Passengers

Other passengers, particularly children and pets, can distract you from driving. If you are going to have a conversation with passengers, do not take your eyes off the road. Allow them to perform tasks such as adjusting the radio or temperature in the vehicle, or reading a map or directions. Teach your young children that driving is an important job and that you must concentrate when you are behind the wheel. Buckle up your children properly.

When you are driving with friends and relatives, establish some strategies to keep your passengers under control. A carload of friends can be very distracting if they are engaging in loud talking, quarrelling over music selections, or horseplay. Arguments and other disturbing conversations should be held in a safe, appropriate place, not while you are driving in your vehicle.

Sometimes passengers will point out things on the side of the road that they want you to look at. As passengers, they are free to enjoy the sights and might forget that your main responsibility is to navigate the vehicle. Taking your eyes off the roadway ahead can easily result in a rear-end collision. If you want to look at sights, pull off the road in a safe place.

Because children can become bored and restless during long road trips, they can be very distracting. They may whine for food, cry from frustration or discomfort, fight with their siblings, beg to stop the car, or ask questions they expect a parent driver to answer. If you need to address out-of-control or distracting children passengers, it is best to pull off the roadway. Do not turn your head around to discipline children while driving. Try to fend off their boredom by carrying books, games, or tapes in your vehicle to keep children occupied during long trips.

Pets

Having pets in a car can also be distracting. They may jump on your lap or under your feet, which can result in an accident. If you need to transport an animal, use a carrying cage or have a passenger hold the pet.

Rubbernecking

Do not slow down needlessly to look at broken down vehicles, controlled accident scenes, or road construction (i.e., rubbernecking). If you are looking to the side of the road, you are not paying attention to vehicles in front of and behind you. Rubbernecking takes your attention away from driving and is a major cause of accidents, particularly on freeways.

Pedestrians and Workers

While you are on the highway, you share it with other drivers and pedestrians. Some of these people won't be paying strict attention to what's happening around them on the roadway, so please be cautious in these circumstances. You should leave an extra cushion of space around your vehicle for persons who are likely to be distracted.

Some examples include:

    Delivery persons
    Children leaving or entering school buses
    Construction workers
    Drivers talking on cellular phones
    Drivers with passengers, or children
    Tourists (particularly at complicated intersections)
    Drivers who slow for what seems to be no apparent reason
    Drivers looking for a house number
    Drivers or pedestrians who appear to be intoxicated
    Drivers looking at maps.

