Changes in Driving Techniques

Advances in automotive technology and safety research have probably made much of what you learned in driver's education obsolete. Outdated driving techniques have the potential to seriously jeopardize your safety when you are behind the wheel. The following tips will help you to update any obsolete driving habits you may have:

    The advent of airbags has changed what we know about the importance of positioning yourself safely behind the wheel. Always sit 10 to 12 inches away from the steering wheel to avoid serious injuries in the event that your airbag is deployed.
    When you brake normally, keep your heel on the floor and use the muscles in your toes to brake - this method allows for greater control.
    If you have antilock brakes, keep a steady, firm pressure on the pedal during emergency braking. There is no need to pump the brakes, because the antilock system does that for you.


Fuel Efficient Driving Techniques

Below are some tips to help you reduce the amount of gas you use. By following these recommendations you will be able to get the best gas mileage your car can deliver.

Driving More Efficiently

    Drive sensibly. Speeding, rapid acceleration and hurried braking waste gas. These habits can lower your gas mileage by 33 percent at highway speeds and by 5 percent around town.
    Observe the speed limit. Although each vehicle reaches its optimal fuel economy at a different speed, gas mileage usually decreases rapidly at speeds above 60 miles per hour. Generally speaking, you can assume that each 5 miles per hour you drive over 60 miles per hour is as if you are paying an additional $0.24 per gallon for gas.
    Remove excess weight. Try not to keep unnecessary items in your vehicle, especially heavy ones. An extra 100 pounds in your vehicle can lower your miles per gallon by 2 percent.
    Avoid excessive idling. When your vehicle is idling you get zero miles per gallon. Typically, cars with larger engines waste more gas at idle than cars with smaller engines.
    Use cruise control. In most cases, using cruise control on the highway will save you gas as it helps you maintain a constant speed.
    Use overdrive gears. Using overdrive gearing lowers your car's engine speed, thus saving gas and reducing engine wear.

Keeping Your Car in Shape

    Keep your engine properly tuned. Repairing a vehicle that is noticeably out of tune or has failed an emissions test can improve its gas mileage by an average of 4 percent. Repairing a serious maintenance problem, such as a faulty oxygen sensor, can improve mileage by as much as 40 percent.
    Keep tires properly inflated. Keeping your tires inflated to the proper tire pressure can improve your gas mileage by up to 3.3 percent. If your tires are under-inflated, your gas mileage may be reduced by 0.3 percent for every 1 psi drop in pressure of all four tires.
    Use the recommended grade of motor oil. Using the manufacturer's recommended grade of motor oil can improve your gas mileage by 1-2 percent. You may also want to look for motor oil that says "Energy Conserving" on the API performance symbol to be sure it contains friction-reducing additives.

Planning and Combining Trips

    Combine errands into one trip, if possible. Several short trips taken from a cold start can use twice as much fuel as a longer multipurpose trip covering the same distance when the engine is warm. Trip planning ensures that traveling is done when the engine is warmed-up and efficient, and it can reduce the distance you travel as well.
    Consider fuel-efficiency when commuting. If you are a commuter, you should always drive your most fuel-efficient vehicle to work or school. Taking advantage of carpools and ride-share programs is another way to make your commute more efficient, and can cut your weekly fuel costs in half (and will also allow you access to HOV/carpool lanes in areas that have them). You may want to consider using public transportation if it is available and convenient for you.
    Consider fuel-efficiency when traveling. A roof rack or carrier can provide additional cargo space, but can also reduce your fuel efficiency by 5 percent. Reduce aerodynamic drag and improve your fuel economy by placing items inside the trunk whenever possible.

