

Traffic Laws

The fundamental purpose of motor vehicle legislation is to ensure the safety of all who share California roads and highways. Traffic laws are designed not to prevent drivers from enjoying the ride, but to create a common understanding of how to navigate the road in an orderly manner and avoid accidents that destroy life and property.

Immature people treat laws as if they were created for other people. They act as if legislation was designed to restrict their freedom and prevent them from having fun. Laws are made by people for the protection and preservation of people. The intent of any law is to improve the quality of life, not to diminish it. Laws are simply "rules" for living. They permit people to live safely and effectively with each other.

Imagine trying to learn a language that had no rules to guide you. Imagine playing a game without any rules. Rules are to living what railroad tracks are to trains. They provide the direction and even the means of reaching a destination.
  
"Rules are to living what railroad tracks are to trains. They provide the direction and even the means of reaching a destination."

California has a book called the "Drivers Handbook" full of "rules" to help people drive safely and reach their destination alive and well. Adhering to these rules is in the best interest of everyone. When one of these rules is broken, safety suffers, and people can be injured or killed. For that reason, the State of California has a system of enforcement to ensure that the rules are kept, but it is not a perfect system. There are not enough police or highway patrol troopers to watch every driver on the road all the time. Something else is required. That "something else" is self-enforcement.

Fortunately, most people are mature enough to recognize the value of rules. They are self-regulators. Even with no one watching to "catch" them, they follow the rules. Every time you get behind a steering wheel and start an engine, you are taking your life and the lives of others in your hands. Mature people understand this, and that is why they are self- regulators. The consequences of drunk drivers, drivers who ignore stop signals, drivers who exceed the speed limits, or others who flaunt the rules are seen in the newspapers every day. The cost in human suffering and hardship is staggering. Unfortunately, not all drivers are self- regulating. Not all drivers self-enforce the driving laws. That is why others must enforce the laws.

Who creates the laws?

Of course, state legislators in every state ultimately decide the traffic laws for state highways. County and city governments can pass certain laws for their jurisdictions, and the federal government passes federal laws. But who decides what is necessary? Along with city, county, state, and federal governments, there are special interest groups who influence which laws are passed. Insurance companies and environmental groups are among those who influence traffic legislation.

In 1966, traffic laws were standardized based on tested safety techniques for pedestrians and drivers. The Highway Safety Act of 1966 became the result. It should be apparent from scientific research and even to the casual observer that when people obey traffic laws, traffic injuries and fatalities are fewer. Think of traffic laws as the government's contribution toward keeping you and your loved ones alive.

