 Welcome, and thank you for choosing our online course for your defensive driving education needs. In this course you will learn techniques to reduce the possibility of being involved in traffic collisions and incurring traffic law violations. The course will reemphasize the responsibilities associated with operating a motor vehicle. As a result of taking it, we hope that you will gain better knowledge of traffic laws and social "rules of the road," thereby becoming a better, safer, and smarter driver.

Breaking the law is something everyone does, sometimes knowingly, sometimes innocently. When we deliberately do things we know are illegal and get away with it, we are encouraged to do it again. Usually, these violations are small ones with minimal consequences, and even typically "law-abiding" people are guilty of transgressing basic driving laws. It is estimated that the average driver performs over 400 illegal maneuvers before being stopped and cited. Exceeding the speed limit, rolling through stop signs, making illegal U-turns, not signaling turns or lane changes - the list of infractions can go on and on.

When we think no one is looking, we don't see it as a problem and operate with a "no harm, no foul" attitude. The problem is that even violating the smallest traffic law can place your life and the lives of others in jeopardy.

During times of war, a common saying is, "It is the bullet you do not hear that kills you." In driving, this could be replaced with, "It is the car you do not see that kills you." Highway Patrol officers say the most common excuse they hear from drivers involved in crashes is, "I never saw the other car." How many times have you yourself narrowly escaped a collision and, after calming down, thought, "I didn't even see that vehicle!" That is the car that can kill you!

Traffic laws are man-made, yet they are based on natural laws. It is impossible to violate the laws of nature without paying the consequences. Step off a building, and gravity will get you every time. While drivers may not experience consequences every time they violate traffic laws, sooner or later the laws of nature will take effect. And when that happens, the consequences that should most concern someone driving a motor vehicle are not those the DMV imposes, but the consequences of permanent injury or death. Every time you violate a traffic law, you risk harming yourself or someone else. Traffic laws exist not to deprive a driver of convenience or fun, but to save your life and the lives of others.

Interestingly, one of the unconscious assumptions we make before we "break the law" is that the other driver will not break it as well. If, for example, we ignore a stop sign, we assume the guy entering from the cross street will stop. What if the other guy is also ignoring the law? If he happens to do it at the exact same time we do -- well, the result could easily be oblivion. It is always best to follow the "Golden Rule of Driving": Drive the way you want others to drive. 


