

When to Give Up Your Right-of-Way

Knowing when to yield the right-of-way to another driver is a powerful defensive driving skill. It requires good judgment, comprehensive knowledge of right-of-way rules, and the ability to set aside competitive impulses that lead to aggressive driving behavior.

Unfortunately, the second most common defense among drivers who have traffic collision is "I had the right of way." It is amazing that, in spite of years of driving experience, many drivers do not understand who has the right-of-way in various situations. For example, it is an unfortunate fact that right-of-way violations are the single most common cause of crashes among senior drivers. They become confused at intersections and cause crashes through their hesitancy and ambivalence. But it can happen to anyone who is not clear on the issue of right-of-way. So, just who does have the "right-of-way", and when is it appropriate to yield the right-of-way to other drivers?

Four-Way Stops: The driver first arriving at an intersection has the right of way to leave first. If you arrive at an intersection after another vehicle, you must yield the right-of-way to that vehicle.

When two vehicles reach an intersection at the same time, the vehicle on the right has the right-of-way. Just remember this simple hint: "Right = right-of-way."

At intersections with no stop or yield signs you should slow down and be ready to stop. You must still yield to vehicles already in the intersection or just entering it. If you and another driver arrive at the intersection at the same time, the driver on the left must yield the right-of-way.

When entering the intersection with another vehicle, there is a prima facie rule that applies unless there is a sign or other control stating otherwise. If a driver has the right-of-way to enter an intersection into which another vehicle has also entered - yield! It really makes no difference who has the true right-of-way if, when exercising your right-of-way, a crash results. The secret is to reach your destination safely.

Pedestrians and Intersections: Another prima facie or default rule: A driver should always yield to a pedestrian even if that pedestrian has no business being in the intersection.

Parking Lot or Driveway Intersections: Drivers entering a street from a parking lot or driveway must yield to all traffic on the street. It would be nice if other drivers let these drivers in; but if no one does, they should not get themselves or someone else killed expressing their frustration.

Emergency Vehicles and Intersections: If drivers hear the siren of an emergency vehicle while in an intersection, they should get out of the intersection as safely as possible and pull over to the right.

Freeway Intersections: Yes, there are freeway intersections. They are called on-ramps and off-ramps. Entering traffic from an on-ramp is a lost art. On-ramps are also called "acceleration lanes" because their purpose is to provide time for entering vehicles to accelerate and enter traffic at the same speed as freeway traffic. By the time drivers are ready to enter freeway traffic, they are expected to be at freeway speed.

When entering a freeway from an on-ramp, remember: Freeway traffic has the right-of-way. It is the drivers' responsibility to do two things. First, they must increase their speed, so they enter traffic without requiring freeway traffic to decrease their own speed. Secondly, drivers should adjust the timing of their entry to enter without disrupting the flow of traffic. Remember that the maximum speed allowed is 65 mph on most freeways. A driver should watch for vehicles ahead and for congested traffic that can cause sudden stops in traffic. Changing speeds abruptly on the freeway is a frequent cause of crashes, so you, as a driver, should not expect on-coming traffic to adjust their own speed in order to let you enter.

When a vehicle ascending a hill on a one-lane road meets a vehicle descending the hill, it is important to know which vehicle has the right of way. Which one should back up and yield the right of way to the other? The vehicle going uphill has the legal right-of-way. The vehicle going downhill has to back up and yield to the one going uphill, because drivers backing uphill have more control over their vehicle than do those backing downhill.

When crossing on a roadway where there are no intersections or marked crosswalks, the pedestrian must always yield the right-of-way to vehicles.

