Planning for an Evasive Action

DMV Image Even with the most advanced driving skills, any driver will still encounter emergency situations. No one who drives, no matter how safe, can avoid them completely. You can be sure of it. So, we all must anticipate these times. As you drive along, imagine the situations that could necessitate an escape. Always look for a way out. For example, predetermine what you will do if the vehicle in front makes an emergency stop or if another vehicle changes lanes abruptly. Allow yourself room to maneuver and give yourself a place to escape. Of course, finding an escape route is much easier when you keep a buffer bumper all around you.

As you constantly look far and wide, stay alert to potential problems. Keep in mind where you are in traffic and what it would take to stop, slow, turn, or make evasive action. Often, drivers who don't do this are driving too fast for the conditions. Conditions, such as rain, snow, sleet, icy pavement, fog, or even smoke from a fire or factory, can present many problems when you will have to change speed or direction.

Unsafe traffic conditions, driving a car with bad brakes or steering, being in poor condition from fatigue, being under the influence of drugs or alcohol, even having a negative, angry state of mind also can present the same safety issues as poor weather. Severe weather can create emergency road conditions, such as flooding, washouts, or fallen trees. Unseen hazards just over the crest of a hill or around a curve or anything that creates blind spots are all reasons to be thinking constantly about escape routes.


Keep a Buffer Bumper

In traffic, it is easy to get a "bumper focus." Your eyes are focused on the bumper in front of you, which creates blind spots in viewing other vehicles. The only way to eliminate, or minimize, blind spots is to keep plenty of distance between you and the driver ahead. In fact, always do your best to keep a buffer bumper all around your vehicle front, back, and sides.

Keeping distance between you and other vehicles, a buffer zone, is like having a big bumper all around your vehicle. It can protect you from many crashes. Vehicles generate tremendous energy at high traffic speeds. When you have to react to an emergency, it is not easy to reverse that energy. What you need is time. Following at an appropriate distance between you and the vehicle in front of you provides a buffer bumper that will help to give you that time.

A common driving mistake is to allow yourself to become "blocked in" without a buffer bumper. Being surrounded by vehicles and having no method of handling an emergency is a recipe for disaster. It is amazing how many drivers are literally willing to bet their lives and the lives of their loved ones that nothing will happen requiring emergency maneuvering. Whenever possible, always look for an escape route and provide ample room to put it into effect. 
