

Maintaining a Safe Following Distance: The Three-Second Rule

When you allow space between your vehicle and the next, you give yourself time to react and a chance to avoid a collision. Four out of every ten crashes involve rear-end collisions, usually because someone is following too closely or tailgating. Tailgating reduces your ability to see and be seen, and limits your attention to the vehicle immediately in front of you.

Follow another vehicle with enough distance to allow for safe stopping, depending on speed and road conditions. Following too closely may result in:

    rear end accidents
    being cut off by someone changing lanes in front of you
    being forced off the roadway
    swerving into someone else to avoid a collision

To avoid tailgating by providing an ample cushion of space, use the Three-Second Rule:

    Choose an object near or above the road ahead, like a sign, a tree, or an overpass.
    As soon as the rear end of the vehicle ahead of you passes your fixed reference point, begin counting: one-thousand one, one-thousand two, one-thousand three.
    When the front of your car reaches the reference point, stop counting. If you reach the reference point before you have finished the three-second count, you are following too closely. If you finish the count before you reach the reference point, you have established a following distance that provides a safe space-cushion.
    Use the 3-second safe following distance rule under normal traffic conditions, during the daytime, and when entering and exiting the freeway.

In some cases, it is necessary to increase the minimum 4-second following distance. Use the Three-Second Plus Rule under the following conditions:

    4 seconds: following a van, truck, or motorcycle.
    5 seconds: following a large truck, passing into a lane of moving traffic.
    6 seconds: crossing intersections, driving on snow-packed roads, in rain, at night.

Four seconds may be a better safe following distance in certain situations that call for extra caution and care. Pay special attention when:

    following motorcycles
    driving on slippery roads
    crowded by a tailgater
    the car behind you wants to pass
    following large vehicles

Maintain a 4 second gap in these instances. It is against the law to follow at a distance, which is too close given the traffic and road conditions. You could be cited for tailgating.

Tailgaters put themselves and other drivers at risk. When the car in front comes to a sudden and unexpected stop, there is a greater likelihood of a collision in the case of tailgating, where the driver following too close does not have enough time to brake. A driver leaving an appropriate gap in the distance between the two vehicles has a few more seconds to apply the brakes and avoid a crash.

Keep aware of drivers tailgating you and avoid them by:

    moving to another lane
    slowing down to encourage them to pass
    pulling over to let them pass

When driving behind a motorcycle, always allow more following distance (at least 4 seconds). Motorcyclists often slow by downshifting or simply rolling off the throttle, so their brake light may not be activated to warn you that they are slowing or stopping.

Braking Distances

Following too close is a critical factor in many crashes. Always keep that "buffer bumper" between you and the vehicle in front of you. Stopping your vehicle is a two-part job. Getting your foot on the brake is the first part. Stopping the vehicle is the second part. It takes time to get your foot on the brake when you see an emergency situation; and during that time, your vehicle is continuing forward. Here's something to memorize:

By the time your foot hits the brake, your vehicle has traveled about as many feet forward as the number of miles per hour you are traveling.

braking distances

If you are traveling at 50 miles per hour, it will take 50 feet just to put your foot on the brake. At 65 miles an hour, it will take 65 feet just to get your foot on the brake, and so on. You need to keep a buffer bumper for protection. You will be more motivated to put the "buffer bumper" principle into effect once you realize what it takes to stop a moving vehicle when it is traveling at certain speeds. Of course, the stopping distance varies depending on the surface of the road, the condition of the brakes, and the skill of the driver in recognizing and reacting to hazards. If we assume that brakes are in good condition and the driver has at least normal recognition and reaction times, here are the braking distances for various road conditions. The distances are computed for passenger cars without anti-lock braking systems (ABS) and on flat roads. To give perspective, remember one quarter of a mile is 1,320 feet. (Note: If you are foolish enough to drive 70 miles per hour on icy roads, it will take you a half a mile to stop! Actually it would be very unusual to travel that far, since you will most likely hit something much sooner.)

Average Braking Distances (in feet)

Vehicle Speed
  

Reaction+ Distance
  

Vehicle Stopping Distance
  

= Total Stopping Distance

10 MPH
  

11 FEET
  

5 FEET
  

16 FEET

20 MPH
  

22 FEET
  

20 FEET
  

42 FEET

30 MPH
  

33 FEET
  

45 FEET
  

78 FEET

40 MPH
  

44 FEET
  

80 FEET
  

124 FEET

50 MPH
  

55 FEET
  

125 FEET
  

180 FEET

60 MPH
  

66 FEET
  

180 FEET
  

246 FEET

Braking distances on inclines will vary considerably. Going uphill, the engine works harder; and sometimes the driver has to use a lower gear to take the strain off the engine. It takes much less time to stop a vehicle going up a hill because Mother Nature, in the form of gravity, is giving you a hand. That same Mother Nature, however, will not help you when you are going downhill. She will be giving you a push. As you already know, it is much more difficult to stop a vehicle when it is traveling down an incline, such as a hill. Vehicles tend to accelerate going downhill, so watch it. You must always travel at a speed allowing you complete control of your vehicle. It is a crucial consideration of your safety.

Though you need to keep control of your vehicle, do not ride your brakes going downhill. Just as it is sometimes necessary to use a lower gear when going up a hill, it is also necessary at times to use a lower gear going down a hill. "Gearing down" takes the strain off the engine when going up, and it takes the strain off the brakes when going down. It is always preferable to "gear down" rather than to ride the brakes. The friction created by prolonged use of the brakes while descending a hill can cause the brakes to fail, easily resulting in a tragedy.

As you saw on the braking chart, the distance it will take you to stop depends on the pavement, your tires, and your vehicle's brakes. However, under the best conditions at highway speeds, it will still take you hundreds of feet to stop. With slippery pavement, bad tires, and so-so brakes...you better make sure your life insurance is paid up, or be a smart driver. Always keep a buffer bumper between your car and the vehicle ahead. You need to give yourself plenty of time to stop, slow, or take evasive action. By giving yourself space, you have time to Perceive, Predict, and Perform...

