

Vehicle Visibility

Driving with your headlights on during the day can seem unnecessary, but it is a practice that will increase your vehicle's visibility and reduce your chance of collision. With your headlights on, other drivers will be able to see you sooner and avoid coming into your path.

It is estimated that driving with your headlights on during the day can reduce your chances of a collision by as much as 25%. A vehicle with headlights on is visible to other drivers at a distance of 2600 feet! The light from your headlights will also reflect off of objects such as parked cars and the windows of buildings, further increasing your visibility. If you are driving around a turn or curve the reflection of your headlights may be visible to other drivers before your vehicle is even seen.

Another advantage of driving with headlights during the day is that your tail lights will be on as well, making you more visible to the drivers behind you as well as those in front of you.

Some highways have mandatory daylight headlight requirements to make your vehicle more visible to other traffic. You must turn your headlights on when driving through one of these zones, regardless of the time of day.

Avoid Lane Changes Near Intersections

Driving through an intersection requires motorists to deal with one of the most complex of all traffic situations. Unfortunately, many drivers underestimate the need for caution and concentration when approaching an intersection, with tragic consequences.. According to statistics reported in the DMV Handbook by the Federal Highway Commission, 45% of all reported collisions and 21% of traffic-related fatalities occur at intersections.

An intersection is where vehicles traveling on different roadways meet one another. Freeway entrances and off ramps, side streets, cross streets, alley and roundabouts are examples of intersections where careful defensive driving is highly recommended.

When approaching any kind of intersection, avoid changing lanes. There may be multiple vehicles converging at the intersection, and abrupt changes of lane at the last minute can confuse or startle other drivers. If you are in the midst of a lane change, you might fail to see pedestrians entering the crosswalk located at the corner of the intersection. If you must change lanes to make a turn at an intersection, move your vehicle into the desired lane before you approach the intersection.

Scanning the Road for Hazards

Scanning is a safe driving practice that allows a driver to see more than just what is happening directly in front of the vehicle. Focusing your eyes exclusively on the road in front of your vehicle is dangerous because it limits your awareness of your surroundings. Scanning alerts you to vehicles entering and leaving the roadway, and forewarns you of potential hazards up ahead.

In order to avoid last minute moves when driving in traffic, you should:

    Look ahead for traffic hazards such as road construction, accidents, and detours
    Leave enough distance to safely maneuver around hazards or disabled vehicles
    Look ahead for signal changes such as yellow lights and flashing crosswalk signs

A visual lead of 10 to 15 seconds or 1 city block is appropriate when driving in traffic in urban areas. Keep your eyes moving to check out road conditions by scanning 10 to 15 seconds ahead of your vehicle. In urban and suburban areas, you can drive about one block in 10 to 15 seconds. On the highway, it takes 10 to 15 seconds to cover a quarter of a mile. Look for vehicles around and to the side of you, and maintain a safe distance from them. That way, if another driver makes an error, you have enough time to react and respond safely by using defensive driving maneuvers.

Parked vehicles can pull out of a parking space faster than you have time to brake, unless you are diligent about keeping a "space cushion" on all sides of your vehicle. By scanning, you are more likely to notice that vehicle in plenty of time to slow down and allow the other driver to enter the flow of traffic.

Intersections

When approaching an intersection, it is important to determine as far ahead as possible whether the intersection you are approaching is controlled or not, so that you can anticipate the behavior of cross traffic and pedestrians, anticipate cars stopping ahead, choose the correct lane for turning, and reduce speed as appropriate.

Once you have entered an intersection with the intention to pass through it or to make a turn, do not swerve or stop suddenly because you change your mind about where you want to go. Unexpected moves may surprise other drivers, and some may not react quickly enough to get out of your way. Once you start through an intersection, keep going.

When entering "T" intersections, vehicles on the through road have the right-of-way. Driving the speed limit enables you to keep your eyes scanning for other vehicles which may not yield the right-of-way. The speed limit is 15 MPH at intersections if during the last 100 feet approaching the intersection you cannot see the other roadways entering the intersection for a distance of at least 100 feet (blind intersection) and in alleyways. If you plan to turn in to a driveway immediately after an intersection, it is safer if you do not start signaling until you are actually in the intersection. This way traffic will not assume that you are turning at the intersection.

Right-of-way violators are especially hazardous at intersections, or where traffic is congested. Allow your eyes to scan the area on both sides of your vehicle as you approach an intersection, and look beyond the vehicle directly in front of you. Look in your rear view mirrors every few seconds to determine the position of any nearby vehicle. Don't assume that other drivers will respect your right-of-way to make a turn at an intersection. Proceed slowly and be prepared for sudden or unexpected changes in the pattern of traffic at intersections.

Making lane changes while scanning the road for potential hazards is a life-saving defensive driving skill. Always check your rear view mirror before, during and after you change lanes, so you are aware of nearby vehicles. Scan the road beyond the vehicle ahead of you, and look over your shoulder to check your vehicle's blind spots, where a bicycle, motorcycle or other motor vehicle may be approaching. Make sure the lane you want to enter is clear before proceeding.

When changing lanes it is important to use mirrors and turn signals, and turn your head quickly to the side to check whether a vehicle is in your blind spot. Look into the lane you want to enter, using your rear-view mirror to check for vehicles directly behind you that may be starting to pass you, and checking the speed of person ahead and behind in the lane you want to enter to be sure you have time and space to complete the lane change.

Although not illegal, it is not wise to change lanes in an intersection.

Cover the brake with your foot as you approach an intersection, and continue to scan the road while looking ahead for potential dangers. Covering the brake allows you to respond by braking quickly if another vehicle enters the roadway without seeing you.

Driving in the city typically involves regular encounters with intersections. It requires you to be prepared to stop for the unexpected actions of other drivers or pedestrians, or for possible emergencies. Drivers should always cover their brake while driving next to parked cars; a car may pull out of a space, or someone might open the door on the traffic side. Drivers should not press on the brake, because this can reduce its effectiveness. Position your foot lightly touching the brake and ready to press should the need arise. They should do the same thing when they see brake lights of other cars or when approaching signal lights. These are early warning signs for a driver to stop.

You should reduce your speed rather than "ride the brake".

Covering the brake pedal to improve reaction time is recommended when:

    You are passing parked cars, as they may pull out in front of you or open their door.
    You see brake lights ahead meaning that traffic is coming to a stop.
    You are approaching signal lights--look for traffic built up at the intersection and for flashing crosswalk lights, because these indicate that the light is about to change.

Keep your distance from drivers who seem to be distracted or inconsistent in their behavior and thus represent a potential danger. Scanning the road and looking through the vehicle ahead of you may alert you to signs that the driver is not paying attention. Allow more room for vehicles driven by people whose ability to drive safely may be temporarily limited by following conditions:

    Inability to see your vehicle due to visual obstructions such as other cars, trucks, buildings or trees.
    Backing out of a parking space or driveway while the vehicle’s windows are covered with snow, ice or frost
    Passing you when there is a curve in the road or an oncoming vehicle ahead
    Being forced to enter your lane because their lane is ending, or in order to avoid a pedestrian, vehicle, bicycle or obstruction in the roadway.
    Looking at a map while driving
    Looking for landmarks or trying to find the number on a building
    Talking on a cell phone
    Having a conversation with a passenger in their vehicle
    Taking care of children
    Eating, smoking or drinking a beverage while driving

Erratic behavior on the part of drunk or inattentive drivers is a warning to maintain a safe driving distance. Erratic drivers will demonstrate uncertainty when confronted with routine driving decisions. They may creep up to a stoplight or speed up and then abruptly slam on their brakes. They may stop too far back or too far forward or even ignore the signal altogether. When someone draws your attention through their peculiar actions in driving situations, exercise caution. This erratic behavior can also be spotted by other observations:

    Excessive lane changes at high rates of speed without signals.
    Driving too close to the curb or center divider: Drunk drivers sometimes use some boundary to keep driving in a straight line.
    Difficulty turning and erratic signaling: They may signal left and then turn right.
    Failure to dim lights for oncoming traffic.

The safest place on the same road as an unpredictable driver is far and safely behind him or her. Trying to pass is dangerous since you never know what an erratic driver might do. He might decide to move into your lane just as you are attempting to pass. Stay behind unless you are certain you can get around him safely. Using another street to get to your destination is another defensive driving strategy that comes in handy.

Should you notify the traffic authorities when you have a close encounter with an erratic driver? By all means. If the driving behavior is inconsistent enough to be potentially dangerous to other vehicles, please do inform the police or highway patrol. Be prepared to identify the vehicle. There is a chance the person may be ill or in need of assistance, so do not accuse; just describe the behavior.

