

Driver Safety Can be Enhanced with Aids

To drive safely, your vision needs to be clear. You need to be able to focus on the visual fields ahead of, next to and behind your vehicle in order to judge distances correctly and spot dangerous situations when they arise. If you can see clearly, you can make intelligent driving decisions. Here are some tools that improve driver safety by helping you see the road clearly at all times.

Sunglasses aren't just a cool way to enhance your image behind the wheel. Your driving skills and behaviors can be improved by the use of sunglasses while you are looking cool and stylish! Think of the countless advertisements in the media featuring an attractive man or woman driving a sports car, off-road vehicle or motorcycle on a sunny day, wearing cool designer sunglasses and looking totally calm and in control. The message is meant to sell vehicles, but it also carries important safety advice.

Protect your vision with appropriate eyewear when the sun is bright. Sunglasses that filter ultra-violet light are defensive driving tools which reduce blinding glare that can be dangerously distracting to drivers. If you've ever been temporarily blinded by the sun or by another vehicle's headlights while driving, you'll appreciate how terrifying it is not to be able to see where you are going in the middle of traffic, even for one or two seconds. Wearing sunglasses in full sunlight is insurance against obstructed vision.

Drivers are cautioned against wearing sunglasses in low or reduced light, however. You can also blind yourself by wearing dark glasses in reduced light. It limits your vision even more dramatically than the dwindling light already has, and also increases glare from the small amount of light there is available for you to see the road. Remove those sunglasses as twilight approaches.

Glare resistance is the extent to which a driver can still see objects and events while facing a steady source of glare. Glare recovery is the speed with which a driver's vision returns to normal after being exposed to glare. Glare resistance and recovery are important for being able to drive safely during sunset or at night.

Glare resistance and recovery deteriorate with age; older drivers must drive more cautiously at night. Poor glare resistance and recovery can result in a driver being blinded by a glare source and:

    Missing curves in the road
    Striking unobserved pedestrians
    Crashing into the rear of a slow-moving, stalled, or stopped vehicle.

A person can compensate for poor glare resistance and recovery while driving by using the sun visor, wearing sunglasses or other dark lenses, and by avoiding looking into the headlights of oncoming cars.

Water-repellant windshield coating can be applied to maintain good visibility in the rain. This product is available in a spray or wipe-on formula that seals out water, helping give you a clear vision of the road. After it is applied to your windshield and allowed to dry, the clear water-repellant coating seals the glass and provides a slick surface that blows drops of water off the windshield as you drive.

Convex and panoramic mirrors can enhance your view to the side and rear of your vehicle. They increase a driver's visibility, thus contributing to the safety of passengers, pedestrians and other vehicles sharing the road. The more you can see of the highway, the more effectively you can avoid trouble! Traffic accidents often occur because drivers can't see other vehicles clearly enough to avoid a collision.

Your vehicle's rear-view mirror, located in the upper center of the front windshield assembly, allows you to adjust the angle of the reflecting lens to improve your vision of the road behind your vehicle. The mirror adjusts to the right and to the left, and up and down, to accommodate the body size of the driver. The angle of the lens may also be adjusted to reduce the amount of glare that is reflected to the driver's eyes from other vehicle headlights and street lights at night.

Your vehicle's side view mirrors can likewise be adjusted by either moving the mirror assembly itself or using a set of switches located on the side panel to the left of the driver's seat. One switch selects which mirror is to be adjusted, while adjoining switches adjust the field of vision reflected to the driver. As with the rear-view mirror, adjustment is made to accommodate the driver's body size.

Convex safety mirrors are one of the most common types of safety mirror available. Convex mirrors have a curved surface, as opposed to the flat surface of plane mirrors, which reflect objects in an image of the same size. The curved surface of a convex mirror produces a wider viewing area, where the reflected objects appear smaller. They improve visibility at dangerous intersections by giving you a more extensive view of what's happening around your vehicle. They make it possible for drivers to see around corners, and thus to make well-informed predictions about the flow of traffic around intersections. A car passenger mirror is often a convex mirror, labeled that objects appear smaller in the mirror and are closer than they look.

A panoramic rear-view safety mirror offers greater back and side roadway reflection coverage. It's been described as something like having eyes in the back of your head. It helps to diminish blind spots, making it easier to change lanes, pass and make turns with full visual awareness. Panoramic rear-view mirrors offer a wide view of the road, making all lanes visible to the driver.

Audible back-up warning devices add another measure of safety for drivers, passenger, pedestrians and other vehicles on the roadway. Transportation safety research has resulted in the development of "collision avoidance warning systems" that are designed to alert drivers to a potential collision when they are backing up. Although collisions that result from backing maneuvers typically do not cause as much damage as other types of collisions, they occur frequently, making them a significant safety risk. Effective backup warning systems operate by alerting the driver to the presence of an unexpected, unseen or inaccurately perceived object behind the vehicle. Back-up warning devices protect the vehicle by informing the driver of potential hazards on the roadway.

There are certain situations that complicate the implementation of an effective warning system. For example, drivers often intentionally back up close to objects, and because the system does not 'know' whether the driver is aware of the object, there is a high potential for unwanted warnings. In addition, drivers might not see something between them and another visible object. To be effective, a warning system must distinguish between the two. The system must also cover different backing situations that occur at a range of speeds.

