

Are you protected?

Sometimes an intersection will help you make your turns more safely. For example, instead of having to gauge your distance from oncoming cars before making a left on a green light, you will be given a green arrow that indicates you may make your left turn and the oncoming cars will have a red light. This is also true for right turns where a right green arrow is given. This type of turn is referred to as a protected turn. It is recommended to still keep an eye out for oncoming vehicles that could possibly run their red light, but for the most part a green arrow gives you more protection from a head-on collision.
  Red Arrow:
Stop. You cannot turn in the direction the arrow is pointing.
  Yellow Arrow:
Caution! A yellow arrow warns that the signal is about to change to red, just like a standard yellow light. If you have not entered the intersection and can come to a safe stop, you should do so. If you are already in the intersection, you should continue moving and clear it safely.
  Green Arrow:
Go. You may proceed if it is safe in the direction the arrow is pointing. Oncoming traffic is required to stop.

Motorcycles Passing and Splitting Lanes

The motorcycle should pass and be passed as any other vehicle. To help ensure this, the cyclist should ride in the left third of the lane. This discourages drivers from trying to pass without changing lanes. It also gives a motorcycle the best chance of good traction because it is the area least affected by rutting, grease, and oil.

When passing, the motorcycle rider should be sure to signal properly, to pass as wide to the left as an automobile would, and to return to the lane well ahead of the vehicle passed. The rider should be particularly cautious while passing in a motorist's blind spot.

Automobile drivers should maintain the same passing margin and distance for motorcycles as they would for any other vehicle. They should also avoid crowding the cyclist in passing or returning to their lane. Return to your lane only when the motorcycle’s headlight can be seen in the inside rear view mirror.

Be aware that motorcycles may travel faster than traffic during congested road conditions and can legally travel in the unused space between two lines of moving or stationary vehicles, which is commonly called "lane splitting".

Motorcyclists are entitled to the same full lane width as all other vehicles. Lane splitting is where one vehicle drives side-by-side or passes using a lane occupied by another vehicle. It is legal in California for motorcycles to split lanes, but it creates a hazardous situation for both motorcyclists and drivers of other vehicles. Although it is not illegal for motorcycles to share lanes, it is unsafe.

Most vehicle crashes occur at intersections, and motorcycles are no exception. It is at intersections where traffic is interrupted that the motorcycle's low visual profile can prove to be the most dangerous. Motorcyclists cannot assume that they have been seen as they approach an intersection, so they should slow down well before reaching it.

