

Lines and Lanes

You stay on your side and I'll stay on mine! The National Highway Transportation System, combined with state regulations, has implemented a family of pavement markings to indicate when and where a driver can pass safely. The rules are not intended to slow you down; they are intended to save your life.

As you may know, yellow lines will indicate that traffic is moving in opposite directions on the roadway. Broken white lines will be seen to separate two or more traffic lanes for vehicles moving in the same direction. Below you will see what these lines mean as far as passing and making other maneuvers.
  A - A Solid Double Yellow Line separates traffic in both directions. When a driver sees a solid double line, it is never legal to pass another vehicle unless there are two or more lanes in the driver's direction of travel. The driver may cross a solid double line only to enter a driveway or a private road. If a U-turn permitted sign is posted, the driver may make a U-turn across a solid double line. Of course, any of these maneuvers may be made only if it is safe to make them.
B - Two Sets of Solid Yellow Lines. These lines mark a strip of pavement two or more feet wide. Consider them the same as a concrete barrier. Drivers may not cross or drive over them. They may not make a left or U-turn over them. As long as the lines are solid, drivers should think of them as a wall. They may cross only where the lines are broken and permit turns.  
  C/D - Left turn center lane in the middle of a two-way street. The lane is marked on both sides by two painted lines. The inner line is broken; the outer line solid. When this lane is available, the driver should use it to begin or end left turns or to start a permitted U-turn.

E - Drivers should move into the broken line bike lane at a point no more than 200 feet before making a right turn. As they are moving into the bike line, they should be on careful watch for bicyclists and pedestrians

Passing in Special Situations

Traffic laws are instituted to protect you. As you examine these rules, you may wish to consider this fact: At 60 mph, a driver will travel 132 feet in 1.5 seconds (60 mph is 1 mile per minute, or 88 ft./second)! At that speed, if you collide with another vehicle, a ticket should not be your worst fear.

    A driver may not pass within 100 feet of a railroad crossing.
    A driver may not pass within 100 feet of or in the middle of an intersection.
    Drivers may not pass on a curve (even a slight curve) when they cannot see far enough to guarantee safety.

Please don't pass this bus! The visibility is bad and there are double yellow lines that prohibit passing. Curving, winding two-lane roads in mountains present another adjustment demand on drivers not accustomed to using them. Signaling distances are greater, the act of passing and being passed requires more space allowance between vehicles, and driving, in general, requires a different set of expectations. Motorists unfamiliar with these requirements create dangers for themselves and others.

    Drivers may not pass while ascending a hill when they cannot see far enough to pass safely. Remember, a driver's ability to accelerate away from danger is impaired while ascending a hill.
    Drivers may not pass when there is not ample safe passing distance between them and on-coming vehicles.
    Drivers may not pass within 100 feet of a bridge, tunnel, or viaduct when their view is impaired or when there is no available escape route should they meet an on-coming vehicle.
    Drivers may not pass if passing safely requires them to exceed the posted speed limit.
    A driver may not pass when a cyclist, pedestrian, or parked vehicle is along the shoulder of the road. In a sudden emergency situation, the vehicle being passed has no room to evade safely.
    A driver is not allowed to drive to the left of two solid yellow lines except when turning left at an intersection, turning into or out of a private road or driveway, in a carpool lane that has a designated entrance on the left, or instructed to drive on the other side of the road because your side is closed or blocked.

Police report that in more than 60 percent of all fatal crashes involving cars and big trucks, the driver of the car, rather than the truck driver, contributed to the cause of the collision. Because commercial Class A and Class B vehicles such as trucks or travel trailers can be much bigger and heavier than cars, the driver of the car is at greater risk in a car-truck traffic crash. However, many of these collisions could be avoided if motorists know about truck (and bus) limitations and how to steer clear of unsafe situations involving large vehicles.

Remember that large trucks, recreational vehicles, and buses are not just big cars. Such vehicles come with built-in limitations because of their size. The bigger they are, the larger and deeper their blind spots, the more room they need to maneuver, the longer it takes them to slow down and stop, and the longer it takes for an automobile to pass.

If you drive in the blind spot of an oversized Class A or Class B vehicle for any length of time, you cannot be seen by the vehicle's driver. Even if the driver knows you are there, remaining alongside a large vehicle may hamper the driver's ability to evade a dangerous situation. Keep this in mind when passing such a vehicle.

Passing a large vehicle, especially a tractor-trailer or other combination vehicle, takes a longer time and requires more space than passing a car. When passing a large vehicle on a two-way road, allow yourself more time and space. Make sure you can see the entire front of the vehicle before returning to the lane it is traveling in after passing. Remember that on an upgrade or steep hill, a large vehicle usually loses speed. Look far ahead when driving and preparing to pass a large vehicle. Watch for the approach of an incline that may cause the other vehicle to slow down. Also, as your own vehicle begins a downgrade, remember that the speed of the other larger and heavier vehicle is likely to increase significantly as it also travels downhill, requiring more time for your vehicle to pass safely.

Dangerous Situations for Passing

Long line of vehicles ahead: If there is a long line of vehicles ahead of you, it is not safe to try to pass. Chances are you will not have time to pass the full line of cars before another vehicle approaches in the opposite lane. You'll also be tempted to accelerate to speeds in excess of the posted speed limit, and that's a violation of the laws for safe passing.

Intention to stop or turn: When a driver ahead of you signals his or her intention to turn and starts slowing down, you should wait until that driver has completed the turn or come to a complete stop before passing. The driver just might decide not to make the turn after all, and collide with your vehicle as you try to pass. Or the driver may activate the right turn signal by mistake when actually intending to turn left. If you are in the process of passing on the left, you could be involved in a serious collision.

Vehicle ahead is at or near speed limit: In order to pass a vehicle driving at or near the speed limit, you will need to increase the speed of your own vehicle significantly in order to get around the car ahead of yours. It is always dangerous to exceed the safe speed posted for any roadway, and adding the danger of passing increases your accident risk.

Sight/distance ahead is limited: You need time to plan and execute your pass, and if you cannot see far enough ahead, you cannot be aware of potential hazards. Never attempt to pass if you cannot see several car lengths in front of the vehicle you intend to pass.

Unable to pass before reaching no passing zone: Do not attempt to pass if you see a no-passing zone up ahead and won't have enough time to return to your lane.

