

Adjust Your Driving for Conditions

Driving in circumstances that are different from what you normally experience requires extra vigilance. The terrain, the quality of the road, the amount of traffic, the presence of environmental hazards or road construction all affect your perception and ability to manage your vehicle. To be a skilled, safe driver, you must know how to adjust your driving to accommodate unusual environmental conditions.

For a person who lives in the country, city driving in bumper-to-bumper traffic can be overwhelming. Coming upon a multiple-vehicle accident or smoke from a fire or factory can create problems you aren’t used to dealing with. For those who live in urban areas, driving long, empty stretches of desert or over narrow mountain roads can pose unique challenges. As you drive through various road conditions, observe your surroundings, and think about what it would take to stop, slow, turn, or take evasive action.

Different circumstances will require different driving strategies. When you approach road construction or traffic congestion, slow down, scan the road and cover the brake with your foot. Be ready to stop quickly and unexpectedly. When driving over miles of open country, stay alert, roll down your window and take stretch breaks. Whenever you drive in unfamiliar circumstances, slow down and proceed with extra caution.

Severe weather can create emergency road conditions, such as flooding, washouts, or fallen trees. Driving in bad weather, such as rain, ice, snow or fog decreases visibility and increases stopping distances because traction between the road surface and the tires is reduced. During rainy periods, a phenomenon known as hydroplaning occurs; and in any type of bad weather, you may have to deal with skids. Performing safe driving tactics in bad weather is much harder than in normal weather, and you must make allowances for this in your driving behavior.

Basic Rules for Driving in Bad Weather

In bad weather, reduce your speed and increase your following distance. This will increase your braking distance and recognition time to help compensate for the diminished visibility. The normal safe following distance for good weather is three seconds. In bad weather, increase it to four seconds or more.

Here is how to compute a three-second following distance. Wait until the vehicle in front of you passes a stationary object like a sign or telephone pole, then start counting seconds by saying one, one thousand, two, one thousand, three one thousand.. If you reach the stationary object before you reach the count of three seconds, you are too close for safety even in good weather.

Other times when you should increase your following distance will be discussed in other segments of this course: when you are being tailgated, when vision is blocked or visibility is poor, when your speed is increased, when following motorcycles, when a driver behind you wants to pass, when towing a trailer or carrying a heavy load, when following a large vehicle that blocks your view ahead, and when merging on a freeway.

Test your brakes. When you first encounter bad weather, test your brakes at a low speed to determine traction. This is done by gently applying pressure on the brake pedal. Do not SLAM on the brakes!

Give signals earlier than usual. Other motorists experience the same weather-related problems as you. Give them ample warnings if you intend to change lanes, slow down, or turn. Remember, your safety does not depend solely on your own driving but on the driving of others around you. The better you communicate with them, the better your chances of arriving safely at your destination.

Brake well in advance. Give yourself plenty of time to stop in bad weather. If traction is poor, early braking with lighter pedal pressure will give you time to adjust and still stop in time. If you brake later, then you must brake harder, and consequently the potential for skids and disaster increases.

Make yourself visible. Drive like the pros. Turn on your headlights, even in daytime, to make yourself more visible. If you are in a line of traffic, and vehicles ahead of you and behind you have their headlights on, but you don't, you can practically disappear from other drivers' sight, and they may do unpredictable things like turning left across your path or changing lanes and nearly colliding with you, because they do not see you.

