Unit 11 - The Rules of The Road


The Use of Lanes

White lines, yellow lines, broken yellow lines- what do they all mean? Painted areas on the pavement and curbs are signals alerting drivers to what they might expect from others or to tell what drivers may or may not do. Protect yourself on the road being aware of the laws that govern the use of lanes on California highways.

Bicycle Lanes

A solid white line along either side of the street marks a bicycle lane. This line will be found four or more feet from the curb and will usually be broken near the corner. The designation "Bike Lane" may be painted at intervals or displayed on signs posted near the edge of the curb. The only times a driver may enter a bicycle lane are:

    To park (where permitted)
    To enter or leave the roadway
    To make a right turn, as long as they only enter the last 200 feet of the bicycle lane

Pedestrians should not walk in bicycle lanes when sidewalks are available, but motorized bicycles may use bicycle lanes.


Sharrows

From time to time you may see pavement markings in the shape of a bicycle with arrows -- these are called "sharrows", and are used to remind motorists that bicyclists are allowed to use this portion of the lane. Sharrows also assist bicyclists with positioning themselves on the roadway.

Turning Lanes

On a two-way street, left-turn lanes are positioned toward the center of the road and outlined by two painted lines. The inner line is broken or dashed, and the outer line is solid. These lanes may be used only to turn left or to begin a U-turn, and may not be used to pass another vehicle. To use this lane, drivers must be entirely within its borders. They should not allow their vehicle to stick out beyond the borders at an angle blocking traffic in other lanes. They should signal their turn and then turn only when it appears safe to do so. A two-way left turn lane cannot be driven in for more than 200 feet prior to making a left turn.

We mention "only when it is safe to do so" because there is a misconception some drivers have that when the law allows something, they think they should then be able to do it; and other drivers will just naturally allow it. For example, just because a lane allows a left turn does not mean that drivers can turn left whenever they want. They may turn only when it is safe. If a traffic signal turns green, that does not mean that they can forget about cross-traffic. Some other driver may run his or her red light. So, even though a driver has a green light, he or she must proceed with caution.

Turning a vehicle is a complex task involving multiple activities. While turning, a driver is very vulnerable to crashes and should follow some simple guidelines offering the best chance at safety.

Right & Left Turns

Left turn from a two-way street. Drivers should start the turn at the left-hand edge of the lane nearest the centerline of the street. Legally, they may start a left turn only from a lane other than the one nearest the centerline (as indicated by *) if a sign or pavement marking indicates that it is legal. Drivers should finish the turn in the same lane they started the turn. It is all right to start a turn from the lane nearest the centerline and finish it in the lane nearest the curb, but it is less safe and is considered poor driving etiquette. A vehicle making a right turn from a side street would be expected to turn into the lane nearest the curb. It can be dangerous for drivers to swing into that lane after having started their own turn from the lane nearest the centerline.

Right Turn. The station wagon is turning correctly. It began the turn in the lane nearest the right-hand curb. It will end the turn in the lane nearest the right-hand curb. Do not swing into another lane of traffic. Drivers may start a right turn from other than the far right lane only when pavement or overhead markings show that it is permitted. They may also use the last 200 feet of the bike lane if no one is in it.

Left turns from a two-way street into a one-way street. These turns may legally be made into any lane of a one-way street if it is safe to do so. Drivers should start the turn from the far left-hand portion of their side of the road. They may turn into any lane that is safely open as shown by the arrows.

Left turns from a one-way street into a two-way street. This turn should start nearest the left-hand side of the street. The pick-up truck may turn into either of the lanes that is safely open as shown in the right-hand diagram below.

Left turns from a one-way street into a one-way street. This turn must start nearest the left-hand side of the street and may be finished in any lane that it is safe to enter. Drivers should watch for bicycles between their vehicle and the curb because bicycle riders may legally use the left turn lane for their left turns.

Right turns from a one-way street into a one-way street. After starting a turn in the far right lane, a driver may use any lane open to traffic if it is safe to do so. Sometimes signs or pavement markings will allow one to turn right from a lane next to the far right lane. This is indicated by the * in the left-hand diagram above.

Turning at a "T" intersection from a one-way into a two-way street. Through traffic always has the right-of-way. Drivers may turn either right or left from the center lane. They should watch for vehicles and bicycles inside their turn.


Left Turn Center Lanes

If a street has a left turn center lane, drivers must use it to turn left. (see C, below) They may drive for only 200 feet (about 65 yards) in the center left turn lane before they make their turn. They should not use it as a passing lane or as a regular traffic lane.

To turn left from the street, motorists should drive completely inside the center left turn lane. They should not stop partway into the lane with their butt (rear part of the vehicle) sticking out and blocking traffic. (Don't you just hate it when people do that?) Drivers should turn when it is safe. They should watch out for vehicles coming toward them using the lane for their own turn.

When turning left from a side street or driveway, drivers should wait until it is safe, then drive into the center left turn lane.(see D above) They should signal before moving into traffic and then move only if it is safe to do so. They may drive across a center left turn lane.

The short version of LEFT turn rules:

    Make sure the turn is legal.
    Signal your intentions and move to the lane closest to the center divider. Note: You may make left turns only from the lane closest to the center divider unless otherwise indicated by pavement markings or signs.
    Begin signaling your intention to turn at least 100 feet (about thirty yards) before you actually turn. If you start signaling too soon, you may confuse the driver behind you as to your intention to turn. If you signal too late, you run the risk of a rear-end collision. The driver behind you needs time to adjust to your slowing down in preparation for your turn.
    Check for traffic in both rear view mirrors and check your blind spots by turning your head and looking over your shoulders to make sure you see others and they see you.
    Brake as necessary to slow to an appropriate speed for turning safely.
    Check the intersection for any pedestrians and/or any other vehicles and then yield the right-of- way to any in the intersection. Turn only when it is safe to proceed. Look left, right, ahead, and then left again before starting any turn. Your last look should always be in the direction you are most vulnerable.
    If you stop before turning, such as for a stoplight, stop sign, or traffic, slow down, keep your wheels pointed straight ahead. If a vehicle hits you from behind, it will push your vehicle straight ahead. If your wheels are turned to the left in preparation for a turn and you are hit from behind, it will push you, instead, dangerously into oncoming traffic.
    Make your turn, continuing to be alert for traffic.


The short version for RIGHT turns...

    Make sure the turn is legal.
    Signal your intention to turn.
    Check for traffic in both rear view mirrors and check your blind spots by turning your head and looking over your shoulders to make sure you see others and they see you.
    Brake as necessary to slow to an appropriate speed for turning safely.
    Check the intersection for any pedestrians and/or any other vehicles and then yield the right-of- way to any in the intersection. Turn only when it is safe to proceed. Look left, right, ahead, and then left again before starting any turn. Your last look should always be in the direction you are most vulnerable. If it is necessary and the safety of the turn requires it, a driver can always legally enter a bicycle lane when making a turn.
    While making your turn, always continue to be alert for other drivers' movements.

