SPEED LAWS

More tickets are written for violating speeding laws than any other type of ticket. Obeying speed laws will not only save you a lot of money, it could save your life. Speed kills. The higher your speed at the time of a collision, the greater likelihood you will be fatally injured.

The maximum speed in California is 65 MPH except: for some types of trucks, school buses, farm labor vehicles, when towing a trailer, camper, or other vehicle, and some other types of vehicles, the speed limit is 55 MPH, and the speed limit may be 70 MPH on freeways in certain rural, low density traffic areas, but only if posted.

Absolute, Basic, & Prima Facie Speed Limits

There are three types of speed limits: Absolute Limits, Basic Limits, and Prima Facie Limits.

The Absolute speed limit: "This is the fastest speed you can travel safely in ideal conditions." It is always the same as the posted limit.

The Basic speed limit: "No matter what the posted speed limit is, this is the speed it is safest to drive under these conditions." There are no signs for the basic speed limit, and it is not the posted speed limit. It should actually be called "the common sense speed limit." It requires you to drive with your vehicle under control at a speed safe for existing conditions. The basic speed limit fluctuates, depending on the weather, the condition of the road, the condition of the driver, and the condition of the vehicle. A posted speed limit may be 65 miles per hour, but, depending on other circumstances, the basic speed limit may dictate driving 55 miles per hour or even 45 miles per hour. If the posted, or absolute, speed limit were 65 miles per hour, how fast would you drive in a blinding blizzard or dense fog? That's the "basic speed limit."

The Prima facie speed limit: "This is the `it ought to be obvious' speed limit." It is a speed limit for certain situations, which is enforced unless the posted limit is different. "Prima facie" is Latin for "at first view," which means you should see it the first time: "It ought to be obvious." You are expected to know the prima facie speed limit for a given area even if the speed limit is not posted. Here are the default limits for selected areas:

    Railroad crossings: The speed limit within 100 feet of railroad crossings, where vision is obstructed for 400 or more feet in both directions, is 15 miles per hour, unless the crossing is controlled by a flagman or an electrical or mechanical signal device.

    Blind intersections: At a blind intersection, that is an intersection where if during the last 100 feet of the driver's approach to the intersection you cannot see cross-traffic for 100 feet in either direction, the speed limit is 15 miles per hour. The only exception to this is where yield or stop signs indicate that you have the right-of-way. However, whether or not you have the right-of-way, speeding through a blind intersection is careless.

    Alleys: The speed limit in an alley is 15 miles per hour.

    Business and residence areas: Unless otherwise posted, the speed limit is 25 miles per hour.

    School zones: The presence of a "School" sign is an automatic alert to slow down.

    Children can suddenly dart out into traffic on foot or bicycle, and special caution is required when driving. Any time children are present in a school zone, the maximum speed limit is 25 miles per hour.

    For example, if you are driving in a school zone when children are present and the posted speed limit is higher than 25 miles per hour, you must still limit your speed to 25 miles per hour. If you are driving in a school zone with a posted limit lower than 25 miles per hour, you must drive at the posted limit. Here is a final admonition: As it relates to traffic control, you must give school-crossing guards the same respect you would a law enforcement officer. You must obey their traffic control signals.

    Two-lane, undivided highways: The speed limit is 55 mph, unless the Department of Transportation or an appropriate local agency has raised the speed limit and posted a higher speed. 

Summary of Prima Facie limits:
Uncontrolled Railroad Crossings:  15 mph
Uncontrolled Blind Intersections: 15 mph
Alleys: 15 mph
Business & Residential: 25 mph
School Zones: 25mph
Two-lane, Undivided Highways: 55 mph

Special Vehicles - No Going Over 55 mph on Highways

The following vehicles may not go over 55 mph on a highway, even when other vehicles may go faster.

    A motortruck or truck tractor towing a vehicle or one that has three or more axles.
    A passenger vehicle or bus towing another vehicle.
    A schoolbus with school passengers on board.
    A farm labor vehicle with passengers.
    Any vehicle transporting explosives.
    A trailer bus. (A trailer bus can transport more than 15 persons, including the driver, and has a connected towing motor vehicle.)

What about going slower than the speed limit?

If you are driving at a speed slower than the normal speed of traffic moving in the same direction on the highway, you should be driving in the right-hand lane for traffic or as close as practicable to the right-hand edge or curb. The few exceptions to this rule are when you are overtaking and passing another slower vehicle or when you are preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. Consequently, unless you need to drive slower in order for safe operation of your vehicle, you are going up a grade, or you are following the law, you should not impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic. And do NOT come to a complete stop on the highway unless it is necessary for safe operation of your vehicle or you are complying with the law! You can probably imagine how dangerous it would be to come up behind a vehicle that is completely stopped when you are going 65 mph!

On two-laned highways it is common to see turn-out lanes for slow vehicles to use to let other drivers pass them. Likewise, there are sometimes "passing lanes" that add an extra lane to the right for a certain distance so that slow traffic can move over while in motion and allow faster traffic to flow past. If you are the slow vehicle on a two-lane highway or road and you notice that there are five or more vehicles behind you and it is not a safe area for them to pass you on the left, you should pull over to the side of the road as soon as it is safe. 
