Railroad Crossings

Railroad crossings are intersections.
This is one confrontation you cannot win. Railroad crossings must be treated seriously, and the rules of interaction obeyed.

Every year, people are killed at railroad crossings in easily avoided crashes.

When barrier gates, warning signals, or a Flagman control the crossing, simply obey the warning to stop.

When the crossing is unprotected, use the following rules adapted from "Signs for Survival" produced by the California Office of Traffic Safety:

    Look for Signs: Drivers should watch for the round, advance railroad warning sign whenever they drive. When they see the familiar yellow and black "RR" sign, they should slow down as it means they are approaching a railroad crossing. They should look both ways and listen. They may have to stop as trains run at all times of the day.
    Railroad Crossing Signs: A railroad crossing sign is used at the crossing to indicate the crossing. Just below that sign is a sign indicating if there is more than one track. There may also be a standard red and white stop sign. Some crossings have gates and flashing lights. A driver should be sure to stop in front of the place where the gates drop down. One who keeps crossing would not be the first person to be hit by descending gates.
    Flashing Red Lights: Flashing red lights are used with crossing signs at many railroad crossings. When they flash, it is time to stop. Drivers should treat them the same way they would a stop sign. That is what they mean - STOP. Also, they must stop if there is a standard stop sign. Once they have stopped and carefully checked out the situation, they may cross if they can do it safely.
    Other tracks: A driver should always watch for a second track. That is the one that kills you. Some people have waited patiently for a train to pass; and, as soon as it does, they rush across, only to be hit by another train on a second track. When a train passes, a driver should always wait until the lights stop flashing. Only then is it safe to cross.
    Don't Get Stuck: If drivers start over a crossing and the lights start flashing or the gates start coming down, they should move it! The warning signals allow ample time to escape. And though there is no need to accelerate dangerously, there is no good reason to stick around either. If they accelerate too hastily, their vehicle can stall, and, then, they really have problems. If they attempt to back up, their vehicle can stall or be trapped by another vehicle. They should just move on across the tracks to the opposite side in a controlled but timely fashion.
    Be a live hero. If all else fails and you are trapped, get out of the vehicle and run to safety. You can replace a car a lot more easily than you can replace yourself. The safest place to run is in the same direction from which the train is coming. But, of course, also move away from the tracks. That puts the collision behind you. Any flying debris is much more likely to be in front of the collision and, on impact, will more likely fly forward, not backwards toward you. Then, once you are safe, you can look back and be glad you are not part of the debris.
    Stay behind your headlights. You can probably imagine people being hit by a train when their vehicle stalls on the tracks, but the surprising fact is that 25 percent of railroad crossing crashes result from people driving into the side of a train. It occurs when drivers "out-drive" their headlights by driving so fast that when a hazard appears in their headlights, they cannot stop or take evasive action in time to avoid it. Drivers speeding up to a railroad crossing can easily make this mistake. By the time their headlights reveal a train coming, they often are going too fast to avoid driving into the side of the train. If you cannot control your vehicle within the range of your headlights, it could happen to you. The "range of your headlights" is the distance between your vehicle and the farthest point you can see by the beams of your headlights. Any time you are driving in a potentially hazardous area, never "out-drive" your headlights. A potentially hazardous area is any area in which an obstacle or danger could suddenly appear. These could include side streets, pedestrians, parked cars, or crossing areas for large animals. And, of course...railroad crossings.

