

Controlled and Uncontrolled Intersections

Intersections are areas where vehicles meet or cross, going in different directions. Intersections are classified into two categories - controlled and uncontrolled.

Controlled intersections are intersections that give the driver some type of indication as to what to do and when to do it. An intersection can be controlled in the form of a sign, a signal, or a person, such as a traffic officer providing instruction as to when to go, stop, or turn. An uncontrolled intersection, however, has no indicators of any kind to control the flow of traffic. They can be deadly. When does a driver stop; when does he go? Which vehicle can go first? These issues concern the definition of "right-of-way," and it is a most important bit of knowledge to have if you want to drive safely.

After a crash, the most common statement traffic officers' report is "I didn't see him." But the second most common defense is "I had the right of way." It is amazing that, in spite of years of driving experience, many drivers do not understand who has the right-of-way in various situations. For example, it is an unfortunate fact that right-of-way violations are the single most common cause of crashes among senior drivers. They become confused at intersections and cause crashes through their hesitancy and ambivalence. But it can happen to anyone who is not clear on the issue of right-of-way. So, just who does have the "right-of-way"?

Four-Way Stops: The driver first arriving at an intersection has the right of way to leave first.

Two Vehicles at the Same Time: When two vehicles reach an intersection at the same time, the vehicle on the right has the right-of-way. Just remember this simple hint: "Right = right-of-way."

Entering the Intersection with Another Vehicle: This is a prima facie rule. It applies unless there is a sign or other control stating otherwise. If a driver has the right-of-way to enter an intersection into which another vehicle has also entered - yield! It really makes no difference who has the true right-of-way if, when exercising your right-of-way, a crash results. The secret is to reach your destination safely.

Intersections with Non-Operating Signal: The prima facie rules apply when an intersection which is normally controlled via a traffic signal becomes an uncontrolled intersection due to the failure of the traffic light. Pedestrians always have the right-of-way, whether or not the traffic signal is working. The first vehicle to arrive at the intersection has the right-of-way; and if two vehicles arrive together, the car on the right has the right-of-way.

Respecting the Pedestrian's Right-of-Way

A person who is walking, jogging, riding a skateboard, or using a wheelchair is a pedestrian. Drivers are required to respect the right-of-way of pedestrians, which means yielding to the pedestrian, whether or not the walking person is following the law at an intersection or on a roadway. According to the California DMV, pedestrians account for 17% of all traffic fatalities. Pedestrian safety is a serious responsibility for drivers.

At intersections where streets join at approximate right angles, pedestrians have the right-of-way whether or not the crosswalks are marked by painted white lines. Pedestrians always have the right-of-way at crosswalks. For the safety of anyone crossing the street, always stop for any pedestrian crossing, even if the crosswalk is in the middle of the block or at corners with or without traffic lights.

Don't try to pass another vehicle that has stopped at a crosswalk, or stop your vehicle in the middle of a crosswalk. Both actions endanger pedestrians. Don't drive your vehicle on a sidewalk, except if you must cross it to enter or exit a driveway or alley.

If you are stopped at a corner or intersection and intend to turn right, look for pedestrians who may be crossing the street in front of you, and bicyclists who may be approaching from behind on your right side. Pedestrians also have the right-of-way at "T" intersections, even if there is no "STOP" or "YIELD" sign.

Be aware that older or disabled pedestrians and parents with young children may take longer to cross the street, and allow them sufficient time. Flashing lights at crosswalks warn drivers that a pedestrian may be crossing, so be ready to stop.

Drivers must give the right-of-way to any pedestrians using a guide dog or carrying a white cane, no matter where they decide to cross the street. Only blind or legally (nearly) blind persons are allowed to carry a white cane. Stop your vehicle within 5 feet of the crosswalk, so blind pedestrians can hear you approach the crosswalk. If you drive a quieter hybrid vehicle, remember that a blind pedestrian may not hear your engine.

Bicycles and Right-of-Way

Bicyclists have all the same legal rights to the roadway as drivers of motor vehicles and must be treated by motorists the same as they treat other drivers.

Bicyclists will normally ride near the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, as they move more slowly than motor vehicles. They can, however, legally move into the left lane or left turn only lane to turn left, pass another vehicle or bicycle, or avoid such things as debris, pot holes, or parked cars. Sometimes, a bicyclist may have to swerve to avoid a suddenly opened vehicle door. Drivers must expect and stay alert to any of these movements by bicyclists. On one-way streets, bicyclists can travel in the left-hand lane.

When overtaking and passing a bicycle proceeding in the same direction, a person driving a motor vehicle shall exercise due care by leaving a safe distance between the motor vehicle and the bicycle of not less than 3 feet until the motor vehicle is safely past the overtaken bicycle.

When the lane is too narrow to pass a cyclist safely, drivers must wait until the next lane is clear and then give the bicycle the same buffer area they would any other-slow moving vehicle. When drivers are stopped at a curb, they must not open a door on the traffic side without first looking for bicycles and motorcycles. If drivers are at the curb and open their door into the path of another vehicle, the person who opens the door is at fault. Likewise, if a driver opens the door of his vehicle into the path of a bicyclist and the bicyclist hits his vehicle, the vehicle driver will be found to be at fault.

Drivers must be especially alert and careful when near a bicyclist. What would turn into a mere "fender-bender" between two motor vehicles could easily fatally injure a bicyclist. For this reason, a driver of a motor vehicle must leave ample safe passing room and must not turn so close to a bicyclist as to put him or her in danger of being hit.

Anti-Gridlock Law

Have you ever been outraged at a bunch of cars that get stuck in the intersection when their light changes and you have to wait several cycles to get across? Or have you been a pedestrian trying to cross in a crosswalk blocked by vehicles? These are examples of an issue that has existed for a long time and it was long ago made a law to make it illegal to clog up intersections.

If you are in the habit of looking ahead to see if you have enough room for your vehicle to clear the intersection or crosswalk safely before entering an intersection, then you are in good shape. However, I'm sure you have seen this happen in front of you at times. Besides the annoyance of a gridlock situation, it is quite dangerous to have vehicles left in an intersection where oncoming vehicles may collide with them. This anti-gridlock law is in effect for intersections and rail transit crossings and police officers will be out there to give tickets for violators of it.

School Buses with Flashing Red Lights

A driver must be prepared for children leaving a school bus and crossing the street. Newer school buses flash yellow lights when the bus is approaching a school bus stop and is about to turn on the flashing red lights. This is a warning that you must prepare to stop. Flashing red lights mean that you must stop until the children have safely left the school bus, and the lights have stopped flashing. In some cases, children will be crossing the street, but whether they will cross the street or not, if the school bus driver has activated the red lights, YOU MUST STOP AND REMAIN STOPPED UNTIL THE RED LIGHTS GO OUT. The driver of a vehicle upon a divided highway or multiple-lane (two or more lanes in each direction) highway need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus that is upon the other roadway.

If younger children must cross the street, the school bus driver will escort them across, leaving the red lights on the school bus flashing. California law requires the school bus driver to do this for children up to the eighth grade. This driver escort is done in no other state, so if you are new to California, watch for it.

Many motorists make the mistake of proceeding when they see the school bus driver return to the school bus, instead of waiting until the driver has closed the bus door and turned off the red lights, and this is a very serious mistake. It is not unusual for a child to straggle behind the others while the school bus driver is escorting the group across the street. A child may drop his or her books or lunchbox while still on the curbside of the school bus out of your sight, then quickly pick up his or her property and dart after the others. If you proceed when you see the school bus driver turn around to return to the school bus, instead of waiting for the flashing red lights to go out, you could easily hit that last child as he or she runs out into the street.

If you proceed before the school bus driver has returned to the school bus, closed the door and turned off the red lights, you can be cited for an infraction offense no matter how clear the roadway seemed to be at the time. There is no more protected group in California traffic than school buses and school bus passengers.

When you come upon a stopped school bus with flashing red lights, you must stop (on both sides of the road unless it is a divided highway or multiple-lane highway). If you fail to do so, you can be fined between $100 and $250 for your first offense and up to $1000 for a 2nd offense within 3 years. A third offense within this time period will get you a suspended license for one year!

Narrow Roads or Lanes

If the road is too narrow to drive entirely to the right of the center, the driver should honk his or her horn upon approaching any curve where the view is obstructed within a distance of 200 feet.

According to DMV California law, drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right; and except when a roadway has been divided into traffic lanes, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway whenever possible.

Entering Freeways

Yes, there are freeway intersections. They are called on-ramps and off-ramps. Entering traffic from an on-ramp is a lost art. On-ramps are also called "acceleration lanes" because their purpose is to provide time for entering vehicles to accelerate and enter traffic at the same speed as freeway traffic. By the time drivers are ready to enter freeway traffic, they are expected to be at freeway speed.

When entering a freeway from an on-ramp, remember: Freeway traffic has the right-of-way. It is the drivers' responsibility to do two things. First, they must increase their speed, so they enter traffic without requiring freeway traffic to decrease their own speed. Secondly, drivers should adjust the timing of their entry to enter without disrupting the flow of traffic. Remember that the maximum speed allowed is 65 mph on most freeways. A driver should watch for vehicles ahead and for congested traffic that can cause sudden stops in traffic. Changing speeds abruptly on the freeway is a frequent cause of crashes, so you, as a driver, should not expect on-coming traffic to adjust their own speed in order to let you enter. That is your job.

Merging with traffic and proper lane changes

Any time a driver merges with other traffic, he or she needs a gap of four seconds. That will give both the driver and the car behind a two-second following distance. As a driver, you need a four-second gap whenever you change lanes, enter a freeway from an entrance lane, or merge with another road.

A driver should not try to squeeze into a gap that is too small. He or she should leave a big enough space cushion. The driver should watch for vehicles around his or her vehicle. He or she should use the vehicle's mirrors and signal at least 5 seconds in advance. The driver should turn his or her head to look quickly to the side before changing lanes while checking for cars in the blind spots.

If you have to cross several lanes, take them one at a time. Filter through traffic slowly. If you stop to wait until all lanes are clear, you will tie up traffic and may cause a crash.

If there are no acceleration lanes available, drivers should accelerate while they are on the on-ramp, then look over their shoulder, find a sufficiently longer gap in the traffic, and accelerate to blend into the traffic. Drivers should always keep a three-second following distance between the vehicle and the car ahead of them.


Special Situations

Timed entrance (metering) lights control many freeway on-ramps. These lights usually allow one vehicle per green light. This is to prevent too many cars from getting onto the freeway at the same time, which, in-turn, causes traffic jams.

Double Merge Lanes: These are provided to give slower-moving vehicles more time to get up to the speed of freeway traffic.

Diamond Entrance Lanes: These lanes are designed to provide multi-passenger (carpool) vehicles faster access to the freeway. If you are the only person in the car, do not use these lanes. The fine is too stiff. Some fully-electric and compressed natural gas vehicles can display a white sticker from the DMV to legally use the High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lanes without the requisite number of passengers until January 1, 2015.

Carpool Lanes: Signs along the freeway tell you the minimum number of people per vehicle required for the carpool lane. They also list the days of the week and the hours when the carpool requirement applies. The pavement in this lane is marked with a diamond symbol and the words "carpool lane". Do not cross over double parallel solid lines to enter or exit any carpool lane except at designated entry or exit places. Vehicles towing trailers are typically not allowed to use carpool lanes, because they drive more slowly and are usually restricted to the right-hand lane.

Where U-turns are Illegal

Making a U-turn means reversing your direction by turning around and going back the way you came on the same street. A driver is very vulnerable to a crash when making a U-turn and must exercise considerable caution. When can you make a U-turn? When are they illegal?

Making a U-turn at a controlled intersection: You may make a U- turn at a controlled intersection as long as a "No U-turn sign" is not posted. Always begin the U-turn from the farthest left lane on your side of the street. You may cross a double yellow line provided you can make the turn safely. The CVC says: "No driver shall make a U-turn at an intersection controlled by official traffic signals except as provided by Section 21465, and then only from the far left lane that is lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel from which the turn is commenced."

Making a U-turn in a business district: A business district is defined as "any area where churches, apartments, multiple dwelling houses, clubs and public buildings, other than schools are present." A U-turn is lawful in business districts only at intersections through openings in concrete dividers and, once again, only if a "No U-turn sign" is not posted.

Making a U-turn in a residential district: You may make U-turns in residential districts if the vehicle approaching you is not closer than 200 feet. You may make a U-turn if you have the protection of a traffic signal or sign, such as a stop sign or a green light or green arrow, stopping on-coming traffic. As always, you may not make a U-turn if a "No U-turn sign" is posted.

Making a U-turn on a divided highway: Don't do it! Very few divided highways have openings especially created to permit U-turns. You usually have to wait until you get to a cloverleaf. If you ever run across an especially created opening, it will look like a break in the dividing lines, such as at an intersection where you make turns. The rule of thumb is that if it isn't perfectly obvious that U-turns are intended by the "break" you see in the highway, don't make a U-turn.

The Short Version

    You may not make a U-turn on a highway by crossing a concrete divider, a strip of land, or two sets of double lines.
    You may not make a U-turn if you cannot see clearly for 200 feet in either direction.
    You may not make a U-turn if a "No U-turn sign" is posted.
    You may not make a U-turn when other vehicles may hit your vehicle. Duh!!!
    You may not make a U-turn on a one-way street.

You may not make a U-turn in front of a fire station, and never use a fire station driveway to turn around.

Traffic Breaks

A traffic break, or separation in the flow of traffic along a roadway, is created intentionally by highway patrol officers to manage unusual traffic situations. Traffic breaks are used to remove hazardous obstructions such as stalled vehicles or collision wreckage from the highway, and to conduct emergency procedures in heavy traffic.

In the case of an accident, for example, a highway patrol office who arrives first at the site may radio another officer to initiate a traffic break. The second highway patrol officer enters the flow of traffic before the accident site, turns on emergency lights and begins to weave across multiple lanes to signal that drivers should slow down and stay behind the patrol car. The traffic break works to gradually slow traffic as it approaches the site of a collision, thus reducing the chances of other vehicles crashing as a result of not braking in time.

It’s important for motorists to understand that the officer must slow to the speed which will allow enough time to clear the accident ahead. An officer may have to stop traffic completely to achieve a larger separation. Accept the fact there will be a delay due to hazardous conditions, and don’t get angry or aggressive.

The highway patrol officers work together via radio to decide when it is safe to clear the accident off the road. Motorists can help them in conducting a traffic break by practicing safe, courteous driving. Remain behind the patrol car and do not attempt to pass or follow the patrol car too closely. Use your emergency flashers to warn other drivers there is a hazard ahead. Decrease your speed gradually until you are going the speed established by the highway patrol vehicle. Avoid sudden, forceful braking unless it is necessary to avoid a collision. Accelerate to normal speed only when the officer has turned off the patrol car’s emergency lights and traffic conditions up ahead are clear.

