

Traffic Violations That Lead to Collisions

Identifying the traffic violation associated with traffic collisions that result in accidental deaths allows us to pinpoint the driving behaviors that cause the most crashes. Every one of these fatalities may have been prevented if one or more of the drivers involved had not made a tragic mistake, putting their own life and the lives of others at risk by forgetting, ignoring or deliberately flaunting the rules of the road.

The California Highway Patrol's Statewide Integrated Traffic Records System reports on driver violations that preceded collisions which resulted in death or injury. Certain violations of traffic laws are more likely to cause an accident than others, and accident statistics point us to the most dangerous kinds of driver behavior. The following table illustrates the relationship between driver actions and collisions in California.

The primary factor that caused collisions between the years of 2005 and 2009 was drivers operating their vehicles at unsafe speeds. Although the number of accidental deaths and injuries has decreased for each of the collision factors listed below since 2005, they still represent the most common causes of traffic accidents. It benefits every California driver to be aware of these numbers. Avoid these traffic violations, and avoid becoming a statistic!

Primary Collision Factor
  

CA Fatalities 2009
  

CA Injuries 2009

Unsafe Speed
  

423
  

47,869

Right-of-Way Violation
  

172
  

26,031

Improper Turning
  

540
  

22,654

DUI
  

629
  

13,448

Traffic Signals & Signs
  

140
  

12,994

Unsafe lane changes, driving on the wrong side of the road, following too closely, violating a pedestrian's right of way and unsafe starting or backing are also common causes of accidents, although they occur significantly less often than the five violations above.

    Motor vehicle crashes were the leading cause of death for children and teenagers.
    At any given moment, 812,000 vehicles were being driven by someone using a handheld cell phone in the U.S.
    An average of four children ages 14 and under were killed every day in auto accidents. Nearly 500 were injured daily.


Speeding - A High Risk Factor

Speed - defined as exceeding the posted speed limit or driving too fast for conditions - is a factor in nearly one third of all fatal crashes. In 2009, there were more than 5.5 million automobile accidents in the United States. More than two million people were injured, and fatalities occurred in almost 31,000 crashes. National statistics for 2009 showed that about 31% of all traffic fatalities (10,591) were caused by speeding. Nearly half of all fatal crashes in the country occurred on roads where the posted speed limit was 55 mph or higher.

Research by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) found that when speed limits were raised by many states, travel speeds increased and motor vehicle fatalities went up significantly on Interstate highways in those states.

Speed reduces the amount of available time needed to avoid a crash, increases the likelihood of crashing and increases the severity of a crash once it occurs. Be aware - and be very afraid - of the dangers of speeding.

Driving Under the Influence

At the top of the list of destructive behaviors to avoid is driving while intoxicated. More California drivers are killed as a result of driving under the influence of intoxicants (DUI) than as a result of any other cause. In 2007, 657 males or 24% of all males who died in an automobile accident, and 244 females or 21.6% of all females who died in an automobile accident, died in DUI-related collisions, although the person who was killed was not necessarily the one responsible for the crash. Driving under the influence accounted for 23.3% of all traffic fatalities in 2007, and studies suggest that this number is increasing over time.

People who die as a result of a DUI-related collision fall into every age group, as shown in the following summary of the percentage of California deaths related to DUI:
Under 15  11.8%
Ages 16 - 20  23.5%
Ages 21 - 25  35.2%
Ages 26 - 30  30.7%
Ages 31 - 40  29.6%
Ages 41 - 50  25.8%

Although national accident statistics are continuing to improve, 32% of all fatal crashes that occurred during 2009 in the United States involved alcohol-impaired drivers.

Time of Day

Traffic collisions on California highways are more likely to occur in the hours between noon to midnight than between midnight and noon. The CHP reported that in 2009, 1,147 drivers were involved in fatal collisions between 12:00 midnight and 11:59 am, while 1,620 drivers were killed in crashes between 12:00 noon and 11:59 pm.

In 2009, the time in which the most fatal accidents occured was between the hours of 1:00 am and 1:59 am on Sunday mornings. The majority of drivers who were killed in these collisions were between 20 and 24 years of age.

Teenage drivers are three times as likely per mile to be involved in a crash after 9:00 pm. Various factors increase the risk of night driving for teenagers. First, driving at night is more challenging than driving during the daytime hours. Visibility is decreased by darkness, and teens that haven't had years to practice their driving skills are more likely to make a mistake, especially if they are sleep deprived. Teenager recreational driving, which often involves alcohol, is also more likely to take place at night.

The time of day is also a significant factor in DUI-related deaths. In statistics reported for the year 2007, more than twice as many traffic collisions involving intoxicants occur between the hours of 8 pm and 6 am, with 36.8% of DUI deaths occurring at night as compared to 16.2% happening between the primarily daylight hours of 6 am to 8 pm. Drivers are more likely to make a fatal error in judgment as a result of driving while under the influence at night.

Accidents and Age Groups

The California DMV has conducted a long-term study into accident risk factors in a series referred to as the California Driver Record Study. Findings from this study reveal some general factors that influence a driver's likelihood of being involved in a traffic accident. Men have poorer records than do women, possibly because they drive more miles. As drivers age, their rate of involvement in collisions tends to decrease, and they also receive fewer traffic citations. Is this proof of the adage "live and learn"?

For both sexes, driver age is related to accidents and citations. Teen drivers have the highest accident-involvement and citation rates, and traffic accidents are the leading cause of teenage deaths in the United States. Both male and female drivers aged 16 to 19 years have the highest national average of traffic collisions and violations of any other age group.

Young drivers' over-involvement in traffic accidents stems from:

    Lack of driving experience
    Exposure to accident risk
    Alcohol/drug consumption
    Perceptual abilities
    Inexperience identifying and handling hazardous situations
    Personality structure
    Internal and external influences
    Poor judgment
    Excessive speed
    Attitudinal factors such as risk-taking propensity

According to the California DMV, teen drivers are more likely to be involved in a crash based on several primary risk factors. First, young drivers are less experienced in practicing basic vehicle handling skills and driver's safety techniques. They haven't logged in enough driving time to develop important learned skills such as the ability to perceive and detect potential hazards by noticing and rightly evaluating information from the environment.

Teenage drivers also tend to have low risk perception - the ability to evaluate the degree of threat represented by a hazard. They tend to underestimate the risk in dangerous situations, and overestimate their ability to avoid the threats they do identify. Teens tend to underestimate the danger in high-risk situations and to overestimate the danger in low- to medium risk driving situations. Young drivers rate certain traffic situations as less risky than do mid-age and older drivers, especially situations involving darkness, graded or curved roadways, intersections, and rural environments.

Teenagers tend to be dangerously overconfident in their ability to drive, taking unnecessary risks because of feeling powerful and invincible behind the wheel. As a result, they are more likely to engage unsafe driving behaviors such as speeding, running red lights, tailgating, violating traffic signals and signs, making illegal turns, failing to yield the right-of-way, and passing other vehicles in dangerous conditions. They tend to wear seat belts less often than older drivers, too. Is this simply adolescent resistance to authority, or another sign of feeling the invulnerability of youth? In either case, failure to buckle up is a life-threatening gamble.

Driving while intoxicated is a common cause of serious traffic accidents involving teenage drivers. For many of the reasons cited above, teens that drink and drive are at a higher risk than older more experienced drivers with the same blood alcohol level. According to the California DMV, drivers between the ages of 16 and 19 who had been drinking crash their vehicles 1.9 times more than drivers of all other ages.

Passengers add risk when the driver is a teen, and especially if the passengers are close to the driver in age. Friends may say or do things that distract the driver, or even encourage him or her to take risks that would seem foolish if that driver were alone in the vehicle. California drivers aged 16 - 17 years who were carrying passengers were 3.6 times more likely to get into a fatal accident than when they were driving alone. The risk of being in a fatal crash actually increases the more passengers there are in the vehicle.

In statistics reported for 2009 by the Highway Patrol, California drivers between the ages of 20 and 24 were responsible for 15.1% of all fatal collisions and 14% of all injury collisions. Drivers between the ages of 25 and 29 were responsible for 11.9% of all fatal collision and 11.5% of all injury collisions. The group of drivers between age 15 and age 29 were responsible for 34.2% of all fatal collisions and 34.1% of all injury collisions.

It is interesting to note that the more accidents and citations a driver receives, the more his or her accident risk increases. The number of accidents and citations on the driver's prior record is an indication of how likely it is that the driver will have another accident. Your driving record is of significant interest to automobile insurance companies because your risk factor is directly related to the number of accidents and citations on your record. And the higher your risk factor, the more you will have to pay for your insurance!

Gender

Accident statistics also include information about the sex of drivers. Data reported by the Highway Patrol for the year 2009 show that male drivers in California are more often involved in crashes and more often at fault for traffic collisions. In general, more male drivers are involved in collisions than female drivers, and more male drivers cause or are at fault for automobile accidents than female drivers. The correlation between gender and accident risk is consistent across all age groups. Whether the driver is age 16 or 60, a man is more likely to cause an accidents that results in death or injury. 
