

A Message From One of Our Customers

You have my expressed permission to use my story about the loss of my dear son Ricky Figueroa. I think it would benefit any would-be Drinking Driver to know the 10 levels of pain a parent goes through, when they lose a child. And it would pay tribute to my dear son Ricky."

- Rick Figueroa SR.

May 26 1990

I got a call in the middle of the night at 3:30 A.M.

"Hello" I said.

"This is Amos (my son's friend)." "There's been an accident, I am OK."

"OK" I said.

"Your son didn't make it." He said.

"OK, which son, Mike?" I have two sons Ricky and Mike. I said Mike, and the reason I said Mike is because Mike had girl friends and was out all the time.

"No, Ricky" said Amos.

I looked toward a mirror and I slapped myself thinking it was a very bad dream and I would wake up. Well, it wasn't. When there is a bad situation you go a little crazy, but that's normal.

I said "Can't somebody do something? Can't you take him to the hospital and save him?"

You can get real crazy when you get news like that. So I hung up the phone. I stared at myself for one hour. Nobody was with me. My girlfriend was out of town and I was alone.

The Coroner called me up. What a horrible job he must have letting bereaved people know such bad news every day. It seems that everyday in our town some kid or some driver is drinking, and 99% of the time walks away from the accident he or she caused.

The time my son died, two men came out of a bar. They were noticed by a cop giving someone a ticket. They saw the cop. The cop then followed the two men. They sped down a street, side-swiped a car then hit the ranger truck my son was in broadside. They hit him directly in the side. He died on impact.

My son Ricky at 19 took care of his brother Mike. I was lost. So was Mike and his Mother. It takes 4 years to lessen the crying. It takes 3 more so you don't show the pain on your face. And all the while you age a little quicker. My hair is whiter than it should be. But I can tell this story 10 years later without crying so much.

I miss my Ricky. I wonder what he'd be like at age 29. Would he have kids like his brother Mike? I thank God my son died instantly. I was so scared he suffered for a while in that car flipped upside down. The men who were drinking went over to the truck and looked in at the three boys. Ricky was on the bottom, Amos on him, and another boy the driver on Amos.

The men ran down a canyon. When the police showed up they chased them. Cases of open containers were found in the car, and the cops saw them leaving out of the bar drinking.

Tell everyone Ricky's story. Tell them that it's not just the person they hit that gets hurt. There are a lot of people that hurt afterward. Parents, grandparents, friends, and the person who was drinking too.

Just don't Drink and Drive. That's it. Don't!

Rick Figueroa SR.

Oh yes and it's true most accidents happen close to home; Ricky died at the end of his street. 1/2 block from his doorstep. He almost made it home.

Traffic collisions are the leading cause of death for teenagers.

That's why the law is tough. So, be informed and be warned!

