Unit 4 - Rights and Responsibilities of a Pedestrian

As a pedestrian, you are responsible for ensuring your own safety by knowing the traffic laws that apply to you as well as to motor vehicle drivers. A pedestrian is defined by the California Vehicle Code as a person on foot, someone using a device other than a bicycle, such as a skateboard or roller skates, or a person with a disability who is using a wheelchair, tricycle or quadricycle for transportation.

Each of these rules is basic common sense and may seem obvious, yet one out of every six fatal crash victims in California is a pedestrian.

Be aware of traffic conditions: when you are walking or jogging, look for vehicles before crossing a street. Be aware of hybrid or electric vehicles that run almost silently, or aggressive drivers who may not be willing to yield the right-of-way to you at an intersection.

Obey traffic signals: When a traffic signal shows the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" (also shown as a "White Walker" or "Upraised Red Hand" signal), the pedestrian must obey the signs. The signs are not just suggestions; they are the law.

Yielding right of way: When crossing on a roadway where there are no intersections or marked pedestrian crosswalks or traffic signals, the pedestrian must yield right-of-way to vehicles, especially those close enough to be hazardous. Making eye contact with a driver does not guarantee that he or she will yield the right-of-way.

Leaving the curb: Pedestrians must not suddenly leave the curb or other roadside area and step into the pathway of a vehicle close enough to present a hazard. The pedestrian must not step into a vehicle's path even if he or she is stepping into a crosswalk. Although the law states that drivers must always yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian, the law will not prevent injury or fatality if the driver cannot stop in time to avoid hitting you.

Walking or jogging without sidewalks: When walking or jogging on a roadway where there are no sidewalks, the pedestrian must stay on the left hand edge of the road facing oncoming traffic. This is to increase visibility for both pedestrian and driver.

Crossing between controlled intersections: Pedestrians may not cross between intersections where a traffic signal or police officer controls traffic. They must use the crosswalks at the intersection.

Yielding right-of-way: When a traffic signal changes to green, or "WALK", a pedestrian must look left and right, then left again, and yield the right-of-way to any vehicle that was in the intersection before the signal changed.

Going part way: If the signal changes to "Don't Walk" or an "Upraised Red Hand" after the pedestrian has gone part way across a divided street, he or she must go to a safety zone or pedestrian island and wait there until the signal once again indicates "Walk."

Uncontrolled intersections: At an intersection where traffic is not controlled by signals, drivers are required to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within any crosswalks, marked or unmarked, but the pedestrian must give the driver a chance to yield to him or her.

Stopping traffic: A pedestrian must not stop, linger or delay traffic unnecessarily while crossing a street.

Pedestrians with limited sight: If you are using a white cane or guide dog while walking on a road, you always have the right-of-way.

Pedestrians on highways or freeways: Pedestrians are not permitted to walk or jog on any toll bridge, highway, highway crossing, or freeway unless there is a sidewalk more than three feet wide and signs posted stating that pedestrians are permitted to use it. Do not walk or jog on any freeway where signs indicate that pedestrians are not allowed. Do not walk or jog in a bike lane unless there is no sidewalk.

Make yourself visible: when walking or jogging at night, make yourself more visible to motorists by wearing white, light or reflective clothing, and carry a flashlight. 
