Unit 6 - Defensive Driving


Planning Trips

Nothing can be quite as liberating as taking a road trip! It is an inexpensive way to have fun and break out of your daily routine. However, it can quickly turn into a stressful and even dangerous situation if you find yourself unprepared on the open road in unfamiliar territory. It's important to know what to bring with you, how to plan ahead to ensure adequate travel time, how to prepare your vehicle to ensure your safety before taking a long trip, and what you need to know about road conditions along your way toward your destination.

What To Bring

Below is a list of items that you should keep in your car at all times while taking a road trip. There are many different types of emergencies that may arise, and having the proper items on hand can be critical in emergency situations.

    first aid kit
    flashlight
    batteries
    blanket
    warm clothes
    drinking water
    non-perishable food
    map or GPS navigation device
    flares
    jumper cables
    jack / spare tire
    tire chains
    fire extinguisher

When driving in desolate areas, it is reassuring to know that you can deal with being stranded due to a break-down by having drinking water, food, and warm clothing available.

Research Road Conditions

Be sure to research the road conditions of the areas you will be driving. Be aware of the usual temperatures of the regions you will be driving through, and check the weather report for the area to find out whether rain, heavy wind or snow is predicted. If there is the possibility of snow you should purchase tire chains or cables ahead of time and keep them in your car. When you know here is a storm heading for the area, you may decide to postpone your trip until the weather clears.

Conditions outside of your vehicle, such as heavy traffic, bad weather, and road work can cause you to become stressed, especially if you are in a hurry. Stress can lead to poor driving decisions. If you find yourself in this situation and notice that you are becoming tense or anxious, get off the road and make a phone call to inform someone that you are going to be late. This will take the pressure off and allow you to drive calmly and safely.

If you plan to drive through a heavily populated or metropolitan area traffic can be a concern. Investigate traffic patterns in those areas, and if possible try to plan your trip such that you can avoid driving there during peak traffic hours. At the very least, prepare yourself for the possibility of traffic, and arrange your schedule accordingly. Become familiar with routes you are going to drive and the traffic conditions on the route at different times of the day. In the future, allow extra time when driving that route, or try another one instead.

While traveling you may see road signs displaying a Highway Advisory Radio Station. It is always a good idea to tune to these stations where they are available. They provide bulletins to drivers and other travelers regarding traffic, collisions, construction zones, and other delays.

Allow Extra Travel Time

It is important that you give yourself adequate time to reach your destination. If you underestimate the amount of time it will take to get where you are going, you may be tempted to break the speed limit in attempt to reach your goal, and the result could be a collision or a traffic ticket (or both).

Research travel time by checking internet sites that allow you to calculate time and distance. Investigate alternate routes, in case road construction or traffic congestion requires you to deviate from your original directions. If you have familiarized yourself with the road conditions and traffic patterns of the area you will be better prepared to make an accurate estimate of your arrival time, but you should still leave extra time for unforeseen circumstances. Accidents, unexpected road construction, traffic jams, bathroom stops and slow-moving vehicles in no-passing zones can all cause temporary delays. Planning in additional time allows you to relax and enjoy the ride, no matter what gets in your way!

Trying to get there in record time can also create emotional stress, physical tension and driver fatigue. When you underestimate how much time your trip will take, you may encounter frustration, disappointment and the dangerous tendency to push yourself in order to keep to an unrealistic schedule.

Being late for an event can cause you to become stressed, and hence drive unsafely due to trying to compensate. However, the few minutes you may make up by weaving in and out of traffic or by speeding are unlikely to make a difference anyway. The best thing to do is just accept the fact that you are going to be late, and plan better next time to avoid finding yourself in the same situation.

Long road trips can be exhausting! To keep from getting tired on a long trip:

    Get a lot of rest before you start
    Don't take any drugs that may make you drowsy, even the night before you start your trip
    Don't drive long hours
    Set a common sense limit of 300 to 400 miles a day
    Try not to drive late at night
    Take regular rest stops, even if you are not tired
    Stop for coffee or a soft drink every 100 miles or every 2 hours
    Have another person drive every hour or so
    Continually shift your eyes from one part of the road to another
    Chew gum or listen to the radio
    Roll your window down to get some fresh air
    Stretch your neck, shoulders, arms and legs during rest breaks


Pre-trip Vehicle Inspection

Before you hit the road, it is important to make sure that your vehicle is in top shape. Performing some quick checks on your vehicle can prevent a breakdown when you are most vulnerable. If you do not feel comfortable inspecting the vehicle yourself, you should have a mechanic do a pre-trip vehicle inspection for you.

The Walk-Around Inspection. Inspect the condition of your wiper blades. The material should be soft and pliable. If you notice that the blades are cracked or separating from the retainer you should have them replaced. Test all the lights on your vehicle: turn signals, headlights, brake lights and emergency lights. It is also a good idea to have your headlights checked for the proper alignment. Check your tires for excessive wear, and verify that the tire pressure is within the manufacturer's recommendation. In addition, check the heater and air conditioner and make sure that both are working properly.

Under The Hood Inspection. Be sure to check all your fluid levels: engine oil, transmission fluid, brake fluid, power steering fluid, radiator coolant, and windshield washer fluid. Add any fluid necessary. Check your hoses for proper fit, leaks, brittleness and loose clamps. Check the battery posts and cable terminals and if you notice any corrosive buildup have it cleaned.

Under The Vehicle Inspection. Examine the ground where you park your vehicle for evidence of any leaks. If you notice fluid on the ground, you will need to identify which type of fluid it is and have the leak repaired. Be certain to look/listen for exhaust leaks as well. Lastly, test drive your vehicle and note the response and feel of your brakes. Listen carefully for any unusual noises while braking. If you notice anything out of the ordinary have your brakes looked at by a professional. 
