Unit 3 - Operator Responsibilities


Knowing When Not to Drive

Certain personal concerns can adversely affect what happens on the road. Many drivers use their vehicle as an expression of their moods. Statistics have proven that a driver's attitude can be the reason an accident occurred, why they were speeding, or going too slow. Being aware of your driving behavior is a key in driving safely.

The Fatigued Driver

Driving when fatigued can be fatal. Every year, hundreds of drivers fall asleep at the wheel, and many are killed in fatal crashes. We can only imagine how many more have crashes simply because of the slower reaction time and poor judgment associated with fatigue. Do you think those people who died in crashes because of fatigue thought they were too tired to drive? Most likely not. They probably thought they could stay awake long enough to arrive home, so they chose to continue driving. Unfortunately, they chose wrong, and as a consequence, they never did arrive home.

Do not overestimate your ability to respond to situations when you are fatigued. Roll down the window and turn up the radio. Stop and get some coffee. The best solution of all, of course, is to pull over and rest for a while. Better to get home later than not get home at all. Do not ignore fatigue; it can kill you and those you love!

The Emotional Driver

Have you ever found yourself behind the wheel with tears streaming down your cheeks or a face red with anger? At the time, you may see no problem with wiping your tears on your sleeve and continuing home, but you are actually posing a serious threat to yourself and others on the road.

Being in an overly emotional state seriously impairs your ability to drive. Depending on the severity of your emotions, the effect can be similar to driving while intoxicated. If you find yourself in a situation where you are driving while emotionally disturbed you should find the closest area where you can safely get off the road and pull over. Do not attempt to drive again until you have composed yourself.

Driving Requires Your Full Attention

Often times stress, worry, excitement, or other emotions can occupy your mind to the extent that you are incapable of focusing on anything else. Always remember that when you are behind the wheel, you must focus your full attention on the task at hand: driving. If outside factors are causing your mind to wander, you are not in any state to drive. You should seek out another person to drive for you, or wait until your mind has cleared and you are able to concentrate solely on your driving.

Vision and Driving

In order to drive safely you must be able to see clearly, to judge distances, and to see peripherally or "out of the corner of your eye". If your vision is preventing you from doing any of these things, then it is not safe for you to drive. Some people see clearly but are not able to judge distances, meaning they will not be able to tell how far or close they are to other cars. Some people have trouble seeing clearly at night, or in dim light, or are easily blinded by the glare of headlights. If any of these circumstances impair your vision you should refrain from driving in those situations. It is a good idea to have your eyes checked by a healthcare professional every year or two. They will be able to diagnose poor peripheral vision or poor distance judgment even if you are not aware of it yourself.

Medication and Driving

When it comes to driving, prescription drugs and even some of the drugs you buy at the local pharmacy can be dangerous. They can have just as damaging an effect as illegal drugs on your driving ability. In particular, the antihistamines can cause a debilitating impact on a person's consciousness and muscle control. Antihistamines, commonly found in many cold and allergy remedies, can cause confusion, lack of concentration, drowsiness, blurred vision, and/or dizziness. Always read the warning label of any over-the-counter or prescription drug and closely follow the instructions. These directions will warn you of any symptoms affecting the operation of a motor vehicle.

Alcohol and Driving

Alcohol and driving is a deadly combination. Use common sense. If you want to drink, don't drive. If you have to have transportation; and you want to drink, call a taxi or use a designated driver.

