

Drivers and Motorcyclists

A motorcyclist has as much right to use the road as any other type of road-legal vehicle. Many types of vehicles share California's roads and highways, and each poses special operating challenges and responsibilities. Motorcyclists face greater dangers because they are hard to see and require skillful handling.

Standard vehicle drivers can help by using extreme caution when entering a major thoroughfare from any side street, driveway, or parking lot, or when changing to another lane. The motorcyclist's smaller size allows him to tuck into a driver's blind spots. Combine this with the fact that the average driver is not looking for a motorcyclist, and it equals danger. In addition to looking in the mirrors, drivers should make a visual check when moving left or right. The safety of motorcyclists is an important concern, and crashes involving motorcyclists can be reduced if both motorcyclists and other drivers take precautions.

Maneuvering

One demanding situation a cyclist faces regularly is turning. To maintain lane position and to remain with the traffic flow, he must:

    Reduce speed before entering a turn.
    Accelerate through and out of the turn.
    Lean his body and motorcycle into the turn. The faster the speed, the greater the angle of lean that will be required. Recognize that at slower speeds, turns are, instead, a matter of steering rather than leaning.

When following a motorcyclist through a turn, a defensive driver will drop back and give the cyclist enough room to allow for unexpected shifts in lane position, sudden slowing or acceleration, or crashing down on the pavement. Keep a buffer zone of safety between you and the cyclist.

Visibility

It would be hard to miss this big group of motorcyclists! But, keep in mind one motorcyclist alone will not be as visible.

Motorcyclists should ride with the assumption that they are invisible to other drivers. When the mind is accustomed to seeing a certain size and type of vehicle, it ignores anything not fitting the category. Some drivers do not see motorcyclists because they are not expecting to see them. A motorcyclist can help protect himself with the following simple precautions:

    Ride with his headlight on at all times.
    Wear bright-colored clothing.
    Liberally plaster his motorcycle and helmet with reflecting tape.
    Stay in the left third of the lane so that the driver ahead can see you when looking in his rear view mirror.

  
Please note: We suggest keeping both hands on the handlebars at all times.

Signaling

Although most new motorcycle models are now equipped with electric turn indicators, the cyclists' signals often are not seen mainly because the cycle is relatively small and the turn signals are low and close together. The motorcyclist should encourage tailgaters to maintain proper distance by signaling them to back off or letting them pass. To help the driver "see you signal," do the following:

    Activate turn signals at least 100 feet before reaching an intended turn.
    Use hand signals as well as electric turn indicators.
    Make a visual check with each mirror before attempting to turn.

Being familiar with motorcycle-riding techniques can help a driver of a motor vehicle anticipate motorcyclists' next maneuvers. Watch them in traffic and note how they signal, the lane position they use, and how their speed changes just prior to performing a maneuver. It is the driver's responsibility to give proper signals and maintain a safe distance between his vehicle and the motorcycle. A driver should be especially alert for motorcycles when making left turns across traffic.

Turning

Turn signals must be given by a signal lamp unless they are broken or not required on the vehicle, in which case hand and arm signals must be given.

Passing

The motorcycle should pass and be passed as any other vehicle. To help ensure this, the cyclist should ride in the left third of the lane. This discourages drivers from trying to pass without changing lanes. It also gives a motorcycle the best chance of good traction because it is the area least affected by rutting, grease, and oil.

When passing, the motorcycle rider should be sure to signal properly, to pass as wide to the left as an automobile would, and to return to the lane well ahead of the vehicle passed. The rider should be particularly cautious while passing in a motorist's blind spot.

Automobile drivers should maintain the same passing margin and distance for motorcycles as they would for any other vehicle. They should also avoid crowding the cyclist in passing or returning to their lane. The rule of returning to your lane only when both headlights of a passed vehicle can be seen in the inside rear view mirror works just as well with a motorcycle's headlight.

Be aware that motorcycles may travel faster than traffic during congested road conditions and can legally travel in the unused space between two lines of moving or stationary vehicles, which is commonly called "lane splitting".

Intersections

Most vehicle crashes occur at intersections, and motorcycles are no exception. It is at intersections where traffic is interrupted that the motorcycle's low visual profile can prove to be the most dangerous. Motorcyclists cannot assume that they have been seen as they approach an intersection, so they should slow down well before reaching it.

It is amazing how many crashes occur when automobiles or trucks plow into motorcycles from the rear while the motorcycle is waiting at a traffic light. To protect themselves, cyclists should keep a light pressure on the brake, just enough pressure to activate the rear light. Cyclists should always remember to make themselves visible. They should wear bright, easy-to-see clothing that utilizes reflective material.

Inclement Weather

Rain, sleet, snow, and ice are doubly dangerous for a motorcyclist. Motorcyclists must adjust their driving to the weather conditions, and to the danger from automobile and truck drivers who have less control over their vehicles.

The single best adjustment any motorist can make in bad weather is to SLOW DOWN. Motorcycle skids arrive unannounced and can be fatal. Motorcyclists should also increase the following distance between them and vehicles in front of them, to avoid any "rooster tail" of water thrown up by the rear tires, which can blind a rider and multiply the risk of riding in bad weather.

When the weather is bad, a rider should wear warm, waterproof, comfortable clothing that allows cyclists to concentrate more fully on riding the motorcycle safely. Cyclists can increase their survival potential if they pull over and wait for an improvement in the weather. Wearing bright clothing also increases motorcyclists' visibility.

Helmets, Again

What a nuisance! Putting on a helmet just to take a little ride. However, serious brain injuries occur in motorcycle crashes when people do not wear helmets. A noted orthopedic surgeon got so tired of treating motorcycle crash victims that he placed this sign in his office: "Give your child a motorcycle for his last birthday."

Without the protection of a steel frame, motorcycle riders are completely vulnerable in crashes. The California Vehicle Code requires anyone riding a motorcycle, whether it be driver or passenger, to wear a safety-approved helmet.

