Perceive, Predict, & Perform

To drive defensively, as expert drivers do, you must use the "Triple P System": Perceive, Predict, and Perform. You must be able to perceive potential danger, predict what is likely to occur, and perform the necessary crash avoidance action in time. To help with the "Triple P System," we recommend using these "good looks":

Look Far

When you throw a baseball, you aim for the target. You could not throw with accuracy if you looked at your feet. It is called being "short-sighted," and it's awkward. Even good walking requires farsightedness to avoid potential danger. The average person looks about 85 feet or more ahead when walking, and the average walker walks slower than four miles an hour. Amazingly, some people do not look beyond 85 feet ahead when they are driving, and their speed is ten or more times faster than when they are walking. Being short-sighted allows you to see only what you will be encountering within seconds, and not what lies farther down the road.

Defensive driving requires you to be "far-sighted." You need to be far-sighted to chart a safe path for your vehicle. A good driver looks far ahead several hundred yards to see where he is going and what obstacles and dangers may be there. By looking far ahead, he can spot potential dangers and have time to react safely.

Look Wide

Good drivers look in CinemaScope, not microscope. As you move through traffic, you are constantly entering new areas and new situations; and each presents a different challenge. To see potential hazards, you need to look far and wide. A driver must get the big picture. What is happening around and in front of you? In our side view, there are objects such as lamp poles, parked vehicles, obstructions, and vehicles entering from side streets and on-ramps. Your CinemaScope picture also must see signs. There will be stop signs, warning signs, yield signs, one-way street signs, curve signs, slippery pavement signs, construction signs, and many others. There are all kinds of signs affecting your driving path, and these signs are there to help you drive safely. Then, of course, there are people. These people will be driving, walking, and riding on bicycles and motorcycles. These people are making decisions independently from us. People who can walk, drive, or ride into your path create a potential hazard.

How wide is your picture? In city driving, the width of your picture should be at least sidewalk to sidewalk and about a block in advance (typically 600 feet). By keeping plenty of space between you and the driver in front of you, you will increase the scope of your picture. More room to see means more room to react.

Look Constantly

When driving, always keep your eyes moving. Do not permit yourself to become fixated on one thing. While you are watching it, something else could be threatening danger, a danger you did not see. Focusing on the bumper of the car in front, staring at a stoplight until it turns green, watching a pretty girl or handsome guy on the sidewalk -- these are all fixations that can cause traffic collisions.

A good driver should avoid bumper fixation. When you look at the bumper directly in front of you, you are placing the responsibility of driving on the driver of the car who owns that bumper. This effectively blinds you to the hazards for which the vehicle in front of you has to adjust. When he must react by making an emergency stop, you can easily become a statistic. A rear-end collision is one of the most easily avoidable of all crashes. That is why any driver of a vehicle hitting the rear end of another vehicle will almost always be held responsible for the collision.

A good driver should avoid signal fixation. Fixating on the stoplight and accelerating when it turns green blinds you to the vehicle trying to "beat the red." The other driver was wrong; but by fixating on the light, you could be dead. You assumed that when the light turned green, no one would run the light.

Life can present many distractions along the sides of a road, including billboards, scenic wonders, attractive people, cute pets or children, or just unusual occurrences that can prevent the driver from watching where the car is going. As a passenger, you may enjoy the scenery and sights, but as a driver, you must always keep your focus on guiding your vehicle safely down the road. 
