Seasonal Hazards

Seasonal hazards can be defined as changing conditions natural to an area. In general, mountains have snow, the seaside has fog and drizzle, and rural areas have poorly-maintained roads. Vehicle maintenance and hazard awareness improves your safety in these conditions.

Driving at night; in rain, fog, or snow; in the desert; or over mountainous terrain can pose unique hazards. To be a skilled, safe driver, you must know what to expect and how to adjust your driving to accommodate unusual environmental conditions.

Three things happen before you can safely stop your vehicle in an emergency situation. You must do the Triple P exercise: perceive the hazard, predict how the hazard will affect you, and perform evasive maneuvers.

PERCEIVE the hazard. Say you see a child playing near a street. A ball he or she was playing with bounces into the street.

PREDICT how the hazard will affect you. You may assume that the child is likely to run into the street after the ball. This action would force you to have to stop quickly.

PERFORM evasive maneuvers. You must get your foot on the brake and stop in time.

  

Performing safe driving tactics in bad weather is much harder than in normal weather. You must make allowances for this in your driving behavior. Bad weather, such as rain, ice, snow, or fog, usually decreases visibility, sometimes even to just a few feet. At 30 miles per hour, you are moving at a rate of 44 feet per second. Just to move your foot from the gas pedal to the brakes takes an average of 3/4 of a second, or 33 feet of distance. "Stopping on a dime" is impossible under even ideal conditions. Add this distance to recognition time (1 second = 44 feet) to the stopping distance on wet pavement (147 feet), and you can easily understand the problems of driving under poor conditions. At only 30 miles per hour, the total distance traveled, including recognition and stopping distance, is 224 feet. At 30 miles per hour, it takes about two seconds and 224 feet to stop. In those two seconds with that amount of stopping distance, it would not be hard to injure or kill someone. 
