

Drivers and Bicyclists

Some drivers are not enthusiastic about the increase of bicycles on the road. They see bicyclists basically as obnoxious irritants sharing the road merely to cause problems for drivers. But bicyclists have all the same legal rights to the roadway as drivers of motor vehicles and must be treated by motorists the same as drivers of motor vehicles.

Bicyclists will normally ride near the right hand curb or edge of the roadway. They can, however, legally move into the left lane or left turn only lane to turn left, pass another vehicle or bicycle, or avoid such things as debris, pot holes, or parked cars. Sometimes, a bicyclist may have to swerve to avoid a suddenly opened vehicle door. Drivers must expect and stay alert to any of these movements by bicyclists. On one-way streets, bicyclists can travel in the left-hand lane.

Overtaking Bicycles

When overtaking and passing a bicycle proceeding in the same direction, a person driving a motor vehicle shall exercise due care by leaving a safe distance between the motor vehicle and the bicycle of not less than 3 feet until the motor vehicle is safely past the overtaken bicycle.

When the lane is too narrow to pass a cyclist safely, drivers must wait until the next lane is clear and then give the bicycle the same buffer area they would any other-slow moving vehicle. When drivers are stopped at a curb, they must not open a door on the traffic side without first looking for bicycles and motorcycles. If drivers are at the curb and open their door into the path of another vehicle, the person who opens the door is usually at fault. Likewise, if a driver opens the door of his vehicle into the path of a bicyclist and the bicyclist hits his vehicle, the vehicle driver will usually be found to be at fault.

Drivers must be especially alert and careful when near a bicyclist. What would turn into a mere "fender-bender" between two motor vehicles could easily fatally injure a bicyclist. For this reason, a driver of a motor vehicle must leave ample safe passing room and must not turn so close to a bicyclist as to put him or her in danger of being hit.

DMV Image

The Responsibility of Bicyclists

Bicycles are returning to popularity as a means of transportation, probably due to fitness, ecological and economic benefits. Bicyclists are legally bound to follow the same rules as drivers of motor vehicles. Bicyclists must stop at stop signs and obey traffic signals, signs, or speed laws.

Serial Numbers: All new bicycles must have serial numbers stamped on their frames. This number should be recorded and kept in a safe place in the owner's home for use in reporting a stolen bicycle to police. Bicycles are not usually registered with the DMV, but local authorities may require them to be. If they do so, it is because this registration is helpful in identifying a stolen bicycle and returning it to its owner. Your local DMV will have additional information whether registration is necessary or available in your area.

Visibility: Because bicycles are smaller than motor vehicles, they may not be seen by motor vehicle drivers. Bicyclists should always wear bright, highly visible clothing - no matter what the weather conditions.

Bicycle size: A bicycle should "fit the rider," and its frame should not be so small that it cannot be handled with ease and safety. On the other hand, it should not be so big that the rider cannot stop it. A bicycle rider must be able to support his or her bicycle with at least one foot on the ground while stopped and then be able to start again safely.

Brakes: A bicycle must have a brake capable of making at least one wheel skid on dry, clean pavement.

Handlebars: The handlebars on a bicycle must be low enough so that riders will not have to raise their hands higher than their shoulders to hold the grips.

Lights and reflectors: In limited visibility situations, a bicycle must have a white light, either on the rider or the bicycle, capable of being seen 300 feet away from the front and/or the sides. Also in all conditions, it must have a red reflector (or light on the rear) visible from 500 feet when in front of a motor vehicle's high beam headlights. In addition, a bicycle must have a white or yellow reflector on each pedal visible for 200 feet from the front and the rear. It must also have side reflectors. A bicycle also must have a white or yellow reflector on each side near the front and a white or red reflector on each side near the rear. If the bicycle has two reflectorized tires, the side reflectors are not required.

Helmets: Any bicycle operator or bicycle passenger under 18 years of age must wear a properly fitted and fastened helmet. This law includes children in attached bicycle seats or in towed bicycle trailers. The helmet must be labeled to show that it meets applicable safety standards. This is the law, and a violation is punishable by a fine for the child's legal guardian. However, the true punishment could be far worse if a bicyclist is in a crash. A head injury can make a person brain dead. Helmets save lives. So, whatever your age, wear a helmet!

California law requires all persons under 18 years of age to wear a properly-fitted and fastened bicycle helmet while operating a bicycle or riding upon a bicycle as a passenger, operating a non-motorized scooter or skateboard, wearing in-line or roller skates, or while riding upon a non-motorized scooter or skateboard as a passenger.

Bicyclists' Responsibilities

A bicyclist is obligated to follow the same traffic laws as the driver of a motor vehicle. In addition, there are some common sense responsibilities that ensure added safety for the bicycle rider and protect everyone who shares the road. Crashes can be avoided if bicycle riders alert other drivers to their plans and make sure they receive back some sign of visual comprehension. Motorists have a right to expect certain riding behavior from a bicyclist, in order to adjust their driving to the bicyclist, thus ensuring the safety of both. These are the responsibilities of bicyclists:

Riding with traffic: A bicyclist should ride in the same direction as the flow of traffic. Only a pedestrian should walk facing traffic.

Riding in a straight line: Except when it is necessary to make a turn, avoid hitting someone or something, or drive over water drains, railroad tracks, holes, or other hazards, a bicyclist should always ride in a straight line.

Giving hand signals: Bicyclists are required to signal their intent to turn just as any motorist. Because a bicycle is not equipped with electronic turning signals, bicyclists should use the same standard hand signals used by motor vehicles.

Riding near the curb: A bicyclist should ride as near to the curb as is safely practical. On one-way streets with two or more lanes, the bicyclist must ride near the curb or edge of the street on either the left or right side.

Passing parked vehicles: When passing a parked vehicle, bicyclists should look through the vehicle's window to see if a passenger is preparing to open the door and get out. When in doubt, bicyclists should exercise caution and assume that someone will open the door. If it is safe to do so, bicycle riders should move out into traffic to maneuver around the door. When it is unsafe, they should slow down enough to easily stop before hitting the open door.

Using bicycle lanes: A bicyclist should use bicycle lanes when available. Leaving marked bicycle lanes is permissible if the rider can do so safely under these conditions: a) when overtaking or passing another bicycle, vehicle, pedestrian, or jogger; b) when preparing to make a left turn at an intersection or driveway; or c) when avoiding debris or other hazard.

Carrying passengers: Passengers are not permitted on a bicycle except on a separate seat attached to the bicycle. If the passenger is a child 4 years of age or younger or weighs 40 pounds or less, the seat must have a device to hold the child in place and to protect him or her from brakes or other moving parts of the bicycle. The child must also wear a helmet.

Carrying objects: A bicyclist should not carry anything that prevents holding the handlebars with at least one hand. "No hands" riding is extremely dangerous.

"Hitchhikers" forbidden: A bicyclist should not "hitch" a ride by holding onto or attaching the bicycle to any other vehicle.

Riding on freeways or highways: A bicyclist should not ride on freeways that have signs stating that bicyclists are not allowed.

Parking: Bicycles may not be parked on a sidewalk if they block pedestrians from using the sidewalk.

RUI: Riding Under the Influence (riding while intoxicated) is a misdemeanor. Even riding a horse on public streets while intoxicated is against the law.

