

Child Restraints

Since 1985, all 50 States and the District of Columbia have had child restraint use laws in effect. If you drive a vehicle with children under eight years old and less than 4' 9" in height, you are responsible for enforcing the safety seat law, which says that those children must be in California State approved safety seats situated in the rear seat of the vehicle. When fastened according to directions, infants and toddlers in approved, crash-tested, child car seats are as close to being completely safe as possible. Small older children's safety can also be improved by having them sit on a crash-tested, raised "safety booster seat" designed to work in conjunction with a standard shoulder/lap belt.

Child Safety Restraints - CVC 27363: Requires that a child who is required to be secured in a child safety seat (Under 8 years and less than 4' 9" in height), be secured in the rear seat of the vehicle. A child is allowed to be secured in the front seat of the vehicle if:

    There is no rear seat
    The rear seats are side facing jump seats
    The rear seats are rear-facing seats
    The restraint system cannot be installed properly in the rear seat
    All rear seats are occupied by children under the age of 8 years
    Medical reasons necessitate that the child not ride in the rear

A child may not ride in the front seat of a motor vehicle with an active passenger air bag if they are under one year of age, weigh less than 20 pounds, or riding in a rear-facing child passenger restraint system.


Car crashes are the #1 preventable cause of death of children.



Children In and Around Cars

Road accidents are not the only threat to children in and around cars. There have been many tragic cases where children are injured or killed by otherwise safe drivers simply because they did not see the child playing near the car.

One common type of accident occurs when the child is behind a reversing vehicle in a driveway. The driver has a limited view when reversing and small children may not be visible through the back window or in the rearview mirrors. Before reversing out of a driveway you should always take the following steps:

    Make certain you know where all children are
    Check for children around your vehicle directly before entering
    Check around the vehicle using your mirrors and looking over your shoulder and be aware of blind spots around your vehicle
    Make sure to reverse slowly as this gives you more time to keep checking all around you.


Children Left Unattended in Vehicles

In 2001 Senate Bill 255 was signed into law, making it illegal for a child to be left unattended in a motor vehicle. This is also known as "Kaitlyn's Law", named for 6-month old Kaitlyn Russell who died after being left alone in a parked car for more than 2 hours. This law imposes a fine on violators, but the real cost of leaving a child unattended in a vehicle is much worse - it could cost the child's life.

During the summer months when temperatures are in the 90s, the temperature inside a car can reach 125 degrees Fahrenheit in just 20 minutes, and 140 degrees in 40 minutes. In these conditions, young children can die or suffer permanent disability in a matter of minutes.

In addition to heat stroke, children experience other types of injuries when left unattended in a car. There are documented cases of children putting the vehicle in motion either by releasing the emergency brake, shifting the car into neutral, or even by starting the car when the driver has been careless enough to leave the keys in the ignition. There have also been children killed and injured by power windows, and other children who have locked themselves in the trunk and become trapped.

When driving with children in your vehicle, make sure that the child is properly secured before moving into traffic. Make sure that any heavy items being transported in the vehicle are also secured, to ensure the safety of both child and adult passengers.

