

The Self-Regulating Driver

Self-regulating means making smart choices while driving based on your experience. Self-regulating drivers keep themselves safe on the road by choosing not to drive in conditions that they believe are difficult or dangerous. Some drivers don't see well at night, others have problems driving in heavy traffic, and others prefer not to make left hand turns. Be aware of the types of driving situations that make you feel unsafe, and try to avoid driving in those situations.

Your Vehicle

If you want to operate a motor vehicle, you will need more than good driving skills. You will also need a vehicle that meets the standards required by law, including vehicle registration requirements and safety standards. An owner of a motor vehicle, including an owner or operator of a taxicab or limousine, must maintain safety belts in good working order for the use of occupants of the vehicle. Safety belts must conform to motor vehicle safety standards established by the US Department of Transportation. Additional safety features such as the car horn must be in good working condition. If you as a parent or care-giving adult will transport a child in the motor vehicle, you must secure the child either in a rear seat, or if the child is under 8 years and less than 4'9" in height, in a child passenger restraint system meeting federal motor vehicle safety standards.

license

Driver's License

Most people assume driving on California's public roadways is a personal right. Actually, it is a privilege granted by the state. Your driver's license is proof that, by demonstrating competence in safely operating a motor vehicle to a Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) representative's satisfaction, the State of California has granted you permission to drive on its highways and public roadways.

The penalties for driving without a license include not only fines and courts fees, but also the towing and impoundment of the vehicle that was being driven by the unlicensed driver. If you have a prior conviction for driving without a license the vehicle may even be taken away by the state as forfeiture. Driving with a suspended or revoked license can mean having the suspension or revocation time lengthened, fines, and even imprisonment.

Vehicle Registration

If you obtain or purchase a vehicle from a private party, you must transfer ownership within 10 days, submitting to the DMV a Certificate of Title, smog certification, an odometer mileage disclosure statement (if applicable) and appropriate DMV fees. If you purchase a vehicle from a licensed California dealer, the dealership will charge you taxes and fees to register and title the vehicle. Usually within six to eight weeks after you purchase your vehicle, you will receive a registration card, license plates, stickers, and a Certificate of Title, if appropriate.

Insurance

The State of California has a compulsory financial responsibility law requiring you to show that you can be financially responsible for any crash in which you are involved. The purpose of the law is to ensure that people operating motor vehicles will have at least the minimum required level of financial responsibility for any damage or injury caused by a crash, regardless of fault, and to remove irresponsible drivers from the road.

Whether or not you own the vehicle you drive, you must keep in force one of the methods of proving financial responsibility. If you allow another person to drive a vehicle that you own, you must still prove financial responsibility required by law. The most common method is maintaining liability insurance with an insurance company. Liability insurance protects you against claims if you are at fault in a collision.

To satisfy the financial responsibility law, your automotive liability insurance must provide at least the following minimum coverage:

    $15,000 for a single injury or death
    $30,000 for the injury or death of more than one person
    $5,000 for property damage caused by one crash.

Your insurance company will provide you with proof of financial responsibility (your insurance policy) with your paid premium. Most insurance companies also provide a card or other document, other than the policy itself, that you can use as evidence of financial responsibility. Keep this evidence in your vehicle at all times.

The Vehicle Code provides for an alternative to maintaining personal liability insurance. Although less common, it is equally acceptable to the state. You can deposit $35,000 in an account and assign the certificate of deposit or bank passbook to the DMV. This certificate or passbook will be held by the Office of the State Treasurer. The assignment authorizes the state to withdraw money from the deposit in the event of a legal proceeding that shows your liability in a crash or claim. This is not a popular method but is a viable alternative to liability insurance in rare instances.

