

Communication and Driving

Communicating with other drivers and pedestrians is one of the most important parts of defensive driving. When you let the drivers around you know what you plan to do, you are being pro-active to avoid confusion and prevent accidents. You can communicate your intent using your vehicle with headlights, indicator lights, brake lights, hazard lights, and horn. These are all useful tools in effective communication on the road, but never underestimate the power of eye contact and body language.

When you are attempting to merge into heavy traffic, a turn signal is necessary, but you will likely get in sooner if you simply catch the eye of the person you want to get in front of and indicate that you would like to merge.

In many situations, the only way another driver will know if you intend to turn, slow down, or stop is through the use of your vehicle's signals. Make sure to maintain these signals as having them in good working order will greatly lower the risk of having an accident.

Use your turn signals! The law requires that drivers signal their intention to turn or change lanes, because most people are not mind readers! Let other drivers know what you intend to do. The minimum distance you must begin signaling for a turn or lane change is the last 100 feet before turning. And you should signal at least five seconds before you change lanes at freeway speeds to let other drivers know your plans. The faster you travel, the sooner you should begin signaling, so the other drivers around you will have time to adjust.

If you find that any of your signal lights are not working you may use hand signals instead. It is also advisable to use hand signals when bright sunlight or other conditions make the signal lights hard to see.
  
Left Turn
  
Right Turn
  
Stopping

Look to be Seen

Be ready and able to communicate with anyone with whom you are sharing the road, whether it is a driver, a cyclist, or a pedestrian. You can never assume that people will do what they are supposed to do. Almost everyone breaks the law, either accidentally or deliberately. If for any reason you think another driver does not see you, tap your horn and alert him.

