

What Causes Road Rage?

A number of factors can affect your psychological ability to focus on the driving task, and react safely and courteously to others on the road. These characteristics include:

    Emotional tension
    Environmental conditions (both inside and outside your vehicle)
    Heredity of behaviors
    Physical conditions of your body
    The amount of training and practice you've had

Research studies that have focused on the causes of road rage associate aggressive behaviors with a syndrome that has been termed "intermittent explosive disorder". Abbreviated as IED, it's a behavioral disorder characterized by expressions of violence that are often extreme and out of proportion to the situation that triggers the reaction. The cause of intermittent explosive disorder has not been described to date. The impulsive aggression and violent outbursts associated with road rage are typically not premeditated.

According to a research study published by the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety in 1997, a conservative average of 1,500 men, women, and children are injured or killed each year in the United States as a result of "aggressive driving."

The data showed that the majority of aggressive drivers are between the ages of 18 and 26, relatively poorly educated males who have criminal records, histories of violence, and drug or alcohol problems. Many of these individuals had recently suffered an accident or injury, an emotional or professional setback such as losing a job or a girlfriend, or the repercussions of divorce.

Aggression has also been recorded in hundreds of cases in which the driver was between 26 and 50 years old. Many of these were successful men and women with no known history of violence, crime or substance abuse, people liked and respected by their friends and neighbors. In these cases, it's typical for someone to comment, "he must have been provoked."

In California, Oscar winner Jack Nicholson believed that the driver of a Mercedes-Benz cut him off in traffic. The 57-year-old actor grabbed a golf club, stepped out of his car at a red light, and repeatedly struck the windshield and roof of the Mercedes.

The AAA study points out that even when a violent traffic dispute seems to be triggered by an apparently minor or unimportant event such as being cut off in traffic it is rarely the direct result of that incident alone. Road rage is often the accumulation of multiple stressors in the life of the motorist, building up to an explosion of violent behavior. Researchers collected and analyzed statements from motorists involved in violent traffic disputes. The following reasons given by the motorists for their behavior were all associated with incidents that resulted in death or injury.

    It was an argument over a parking space.
    He cut me off.
    She wouldn't let me pass.
    A driver was shot to death "because he hit my car."
    He/she was driving too slowly.
    He wouldn't turn off his high beams.
    I never would have shot him if he hadn't rear-ended me.
    They kept tailgating me.
    She kept crossing lanes without signaling - maybe I over-reacted, but it taught her a lesson.

Road rage is a reaction to events that may or may not be under the driver's control. Drivers who describe the experience of road rage say that the feelings of anger and their destructive impulses can actually be diminished if the other driver makes a gesture of apology to acknowledge that you were at fault. Mouthing the words "I'm sorry," holding up your hands in a gesture of prayer or mock surrender, or making a regretful, apologetic face will send the message to the other driver that you are sorry for your mistake.

According to a medical survey conducted on the topic of road rage, over half of all drivers in America will either express "road rage" themselves or encounter another driver in a fit of "road rage" focused at them while they are driving.

