

Dealing with Aggressive Drivers

There are ways to handle traffic dispute situations that won't result in destructive violence. First, you need to understand how to manage your own emotions and actions while driving. Although you can't control another driver's behavior, you can control your own. When another driver cuts you off, how you react will determine what happens next.

First, try not to take another driver's actions personally. He or she may have just made a poor driving decision that had nothing to do with you. Remember that everyone makes mistakes, and that this driver may have been too distracted to practice courteous, safe driving. Even though this driver is acting inappropriately, how you respond is up to you.

When a traffic situation with another driver makes you angry, take a few deep breaths immediately. Observe but do not act on your impulse to attack the other motorist. If you are able to back off, take a deep breath, and remain calm, then you can defuse a potentially violent situation.

In some situations, anger is an automatic response to someone's irresponsible or dangerous behavior. There are times you won't be able to control your angry reaction to bad drivers, but you can take responsibility for your actions and decisions. Anger is never a justification for aggressive behavior toward another motorist or pedestrian.

Some drivers seem to feel free to be annoying by driving in ways that obstruct the flow of traffic. For example, there are the chronically slow drivers, who always drive under the speed limit and never pull over to allow the vehicles behind them to pass. There are drivers who chronically fail to use their turn signal and make abrupt, unexpected turns, putting other vehicles on the defensive. This kind of driver inspires frustration and impatience on the part of other drivers, and this can escalate to road rage.

If you are the slow, obstructive driver with a belligerent attitude, you might remember that the road does not belong to you. Safe driving includes practicing courtesy, recognizing that we all share the road with other motorists, pedestrians, and cyclists. Think about other people who must get to work on time, or who have important appointments that you will make them late for, and pull over.

If an incident occurs on the road and you are about to become the target of another driver's rage, there are ways to protect yourself. If you must stop your vehicle, remain in your car, and if the driver approaches your vehicle, roll up the windows and lock the doors. Don't make facial or bodily gestures that communicate hostility, fear or contempt.

In general, deal with aggressive drivers by staying out of their way. If someone has been tailgating you for miles and you feel your blood pressure rising, pull over to the side of the road and let that driver pass. You may have to vent your frustration to a passenger, or tell a friend or family member about it when you get home. But please avoid yelling at the driver as he or she passes, because your anger might ignite a conflict.

