Unit 7 - Collision Avoidance


Why do traffic collisions happen, and what can be done to prevent them?

Traffic collisions are consistently one of the top 5 causes of death in the United States. Avoiding and preventing collisions is the constant responsibility of everyone who drives a motor vehicle. Every single time you sit behind the wheel, remember that your life is in your own hands - literally!

Knowing why and when traffic collisions happen will help you steer clear of dangerous situations. With the information provided in this unit, you'll learn how to employ defensive driving measures that can increase your own safety, protect your passengers, and ensure the security of pedestrians who share the road. Thousands of lives can potentially be saved each year if drivers become more aware of the physical, psychological, road, and weather conditions that increase accident risk.

Collisions are the tragic cause of accidental death and physical injury every year. When you are involved in a collision, you become a statistic. Statistics about traffic fatalities are based on data collected by the State of California through the California Highway Patrol in a data system named the Statewide Integrated Traffic Records System. SWITRS receives data from all police jurisdictions in the state on all traffic crashes. The statistics about California traffic collisions included in Unit 7 were reported for the period of time between 2007 and 2009.

According to data released by the California Highway Patrol for the year 2009, a traffic collision was reported on the average every one minute and 14 seconds in California, with a total of 3,076 persons killed and 232,777 persons injured. There were a total of 426,228 traffic collisions in California, of which 2,805 were fatal and 163,524 were injury collisions. Property damage was reported in 259,899 collisions.

On average, one person was killed every 2 hours and 51 minutes and one person was injured every two minutes and 15 seconds as a result of a traffic collision. For each person killed, there were 76 persons injured. In 29 % of the fatal and injury collisions, speeding was cited as the primary collision factor.

One of the purposes for collecting and analyzing data on traffic collisions is to increase driver awareness of what constitutes a dangerous mistake or fatal failure in judgment. Driver education also builds knowledge of what constitutes safe, defensive driving - the kind of driving that protects lives, physical health and property. The more California drivers know the facts and apply the strategies that decrease risk, the fewer accidents are likely to happen on California highways.

The Highway Patrol reported in 2009 that California had the lowest number of fatal collisions since 1954, when 2,706 fatal collisions were reported, and the lowest number of injury collisions since 1954, when 160,370 were reported statewide. Driver safety issues such as driving under the influence of intoxicants and sending text messages on a cell phone while driving have been strongly and consistently brought to the public's attention by the Department of Motor Vehicles and by concerned focus groups like MADD (Mothers Against Drunk Driving.) California drivers, are you listening? 
