

Common Causes of Collisions

The six most common behaviors which cause accidents are:

    Unsafe speed
    Driving on the wrong side of the road
    Improper turns
    Violating right-of-way rules
    Violating stop signals and signs
    Driver distractions (discussed more in depth later)


Unsafe speed causes collisions

Speed is indicated as the primary collision factor in about one-third of all fatal and injury collisions. The faster that you drive, the less time you have to react to road hazards, the longer it takes for you to stop your vehicle, and the greater the impact and injuries will be if you have an accident.

The basic speed law in California says that no person shall drive a vehicle upon a highway at a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent having due regard for weather, visibility, traffic conditions, and the surface width of the highway, and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons or property.

It is unsafe and illegal to drive faster than the posted speed limit. You should drive slower than the posted speed limit if road or weather conditions warrant doing so. However, driving too slowly can also be unsafe and cause an accident.

Warning speed limits on curves and freeway ramps should be obeyed at all times. These speed limits are posted to help you avoid accidents, even in ideal conditions. If the road or weather conditions are less than perfect, you should drive even slower than these recommended limits.

The key to avoiding accidents caused by unsafe speed is obvious: Slow down. Be aware of posted limits, road conditions, and the weather, and adjust your speed accordingly.

Driving on the wrong side of the road causes collisions

You should be able to determine whether you are on the wrong side of the road by the color of the lines painted on the pavement. If there is a yellow line on your right or if there is not one on your left, you are on the wrong side of the road. There are many clues you can look for to ensure that you are driving on the correct side of the highway.

Look for WRONG WAY and DO NOT ENTER signs when making left and right turns into traffic. These signs warn you that you are driving towards oncoming traffic. Watch out for one-way streets! People often drive on the wrong side of the road on one-way streets. Before you turn onto a street, you should look for ONE WAY traffic signs which warn you of the direction that traffic on the road travels.

When you turn on a road, you should also look for the way that parked cars are facing and to see whether there is a yellow line in the middle of the road. If all lanes are divided by white lines, you should be especially careful to ensure that traffic is traveling in the direction that you think. Be especially careful when driving in metropolitan areas that you are unfamiliar with.

Passing other vehicles on two-lane roads is another situation in which you will find yourself driving on the wrong side of the road. Before attempting to pass, you need to make sure that:

    Passing is not prohibited by a sign or pavement marking.
    Your view of oncoming traffic is not obstructed by a turn, hill, or object.
    You have enough space in oncoming traffic to pass the other vehicle safely. Passing several cars at one time is particularly dangerous.

Given the choice between two or more lanes of travel in your direction on an undivided highway, it is safest to choose the lane that is not right next to oncoming traffic. If a drunk or fatigued driver swerves into oncoming traffic, you will have more time to react if you are not driving in the lane closest to oncoming traffic.

To avoid accidents by driving on the wrong side of the road, you need to be aware of signs and pavement markings, and make sure that you have adequate space to pass safely.

Making improper turns causes collisions

Making an illegal or otherwise improper turn is the primary collision factor in about 9% of fatal and injury collisions in California.

Illegal left, right, and U-turns are dangerous. When signs and road marking prohibit these turns, it is for your safety. Failure to obey these signs and road markings can result in a serious accident.

Do not attempt to make a right, left, or U turn when your view, or the view of other drivers and pedestrians is obstructed, such as by parked cars, a hill or turn in the road, or by bushes or trees.

You must use your turn signal before making a turn. Your turn signal lets other drivers know what your intentions are. You should also be aware of other drivers' signals and choose an appropriate course of action should they not follow through with their turn. You need a large enough gap in traffic to be able to get up to speed before you make a right or left turn. Make sure that you have a large enough gap in oncoming traffic and in traffic traveling in the lane you are going to enter to be able to turn safely.

When you turn left, yield the right-of-way to all vehicles on the same road coming from the opposite direction - vehicles that are close enough to pose a hazard. Turn only when you can see that it is safe and make sure to look for motorcyclists and bicyclists.

When making left turns on divided highways or roadways with several lanes, watch out for vehicles coming in any lane that you must cross.

Violating right-of-way rules causes collisions

Failure to yield the right-of-way to another vehicle or pedestrian is the primary collision factor in about 20% of fatal and injury collisions in California.

The two major mistakes that drivers make regarding right-of-way are assuming that other drivers will give them the right-of-way and failure to yield the right-of-way to others. Never assume that another driver will yield the right-of-way to you, and you should never insist on taking the right-of-way, if it will help to avoid an accident. Remember that: (a) not everyone knows the right-of-way laws, and (b) not everyone will obey the right-of-way laws. In either case, you should be prepared for other drivers to make mistakes.

If you are in a hurry, or otherwise emotionally distressed, it is easy to feel like you can demand the right-of-way from other drivers. This sort of unhealthy belief can lead to serious accidents.

Remember that you do not have the right-of-way at a YIELD sign or when entering a roadway from a side street, freeway on-ramp, driveway, or from being parked on the side of the roadway. You should yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians already using the traffic lane.

In addition to other vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles also have a right to use the roadway. Be sure to look for them before making turns or lane changes. Common courtesy and a non-assuming attitude are the keys to avoiding accidents caused by right-of-way violations.

Violating stop signs and signals causes collisions

Failure to obey a stop sign or signal is the primary collision factor in about 9% of fatal and injury collisions in California.

Stop signs and red lights mean to completely stop your vehicle behind the limit line, crosswalk, or before the intersection. Every time you stop, you should feel your body move slightly forward and then backwards. This is because you are breaking the force of inertia on your body that makes it keep moving forward even though the vehicle is slowing down. If you do not feel yourself move backwards against your seat, you have not stopped completely.

You must give the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians who arrived before you at the intersection, or who are currently in the intersection.

On divided highways, a STOP sign for crossing or turning vehicles is often placed on the island or dividing strip. You must also stop for these signs.

STOP signs are sometimes accompanied by small red multi-way supplemental plates (e.g., all-way and 4-way) which indicate whether other traffic also has a stop sign.

Intersections are the most common place where accidents occur in urban areas. Because vehicles moving in different directions of travel meet at intersections, and because pedestrians are often present, intersections of two or more streets are very dangerous. Remember that you should stop at a yellow signal light, if you can do so safely.

Driver distractions cause collisions

Distraction is anything that diverts the driver's attention from the primary tasks of navigating the vehicle and responding intelligently to critical events that may happen on the highway. A distraction is anything that takes your eyes off the road (visual distraction), your mind off the road (cognitive distraction), or your hands off the wheel (manual distraction).

Driver distractions can include one or more form of visual, manual or cognitive diversion. For example, locating and loading a music CD while driving constitutes a visual distraction (taking your eyes off the road to look for the CD) combined with a manual distraction (taking your hands off the wheel to reach for the CD case, remove the CD and load it into the player.) If you have to rummage around the car for the CD, it's a visual, manual and cognitive distraction, - your brain is also processing information to answer the question, "Where's that CD?"

There are two basic aspects of the distraction safety problem. First, the activity or task which distracts you requires some degree of your attention, because a certain amount of your visual, cognitive and manual ability is necessary to complete the task. The second aspect of distracted driving is how often a driver engages in the distracting task. Something you repeat over and over again - such as turning your head while talking to a passenger - can add up to a bigger risk. Even a simple task can become a significant safety problem if you are performing it a large percentage of the time while you are driving.

In fact, many of the activities that may result in distracted driving fit into more than one category of distraction. Something as ordinary as eating a sandwich with one hand while steering a vehicle is both visual and manual. It should be obvious that a distraction which involves your eyes, hands and brain simultaneously is a potentially lethal combination. Yet even a simple distraction can be just as deadly.

If you take your eyes off the road or lose your concentration for just a second, you could find yourself involved in an accident. One second not looking at the road means one fewer second that you have to react to emergency situations.

Types of driver distractions and how to deal with them are discussed at length in Unit 9, "Driver Distractions".

